===========
Aviso Legal
===========

.. raw:: html

   <div class="legalnotice">

FreeBSD is a registered trademark of the FreeBSD Foundation.

3Com and HomeConnect are registered trademarks of 3Com Corporation.

3ware is a registered trademarks of 3ware Inc.

ARM is a registered trademark of ARM Limited.

Adaptec is a registered trademark of Adaptec, Inc.

Adobe, Acrobat, Acrobat Reader, and PostScript are either registered
trademarks or trademarks of Adobe Systems Incorporated in the United
States and/or other countries.

Apple, AirPort, FireWire, Mac, Macintosh, Mac OS, Quicktime, and
TrueType are trademarks of Apple Computer, Inc., registered in the
United States and other countries.

Corel and WordPerfect are trademarks or registered trademarks of Corel
Corporation and/or its subsidiaries in Canada, the United States and/or
other countries.

Sound Blaster is a trademark of Creative Technology Ltd. in the United
States and/or other countries.

CVSup is a registered trademark of John D. Polstra.

Heidelberg, Helvetica, Palatino, and Times Roman are either registered
trademarks or trademarks of Heidelberger Druckmaschinen AG in the U.S.
and other countries.

IBM, AIX, OS/2, PowerPC, PS/2, S/390, and ThinkPad are trademarks of
International Business Machines Corporation in the United States, other
countries, or both.

IEEE, POSIX, and 802 are registered trademarks of Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. in the United States.

Intel, Celeron, EtherExpress, i386, i486, Itanium, Pentium, and Xeon are
trademarks or registered trademarks of Intel Corporation or its
subsidiaries in the United States and other countries.

Intuit and Quicken are registered trademarks and/or registered service
marks of Intuit Inc., or one of its subsidiaries, in the United States
and other countries.

Linux is a registered trademark of Linus Torvalds.

LSI Logic, AcceleRAID, eXtremeRAID, MegaRAID and Mylex are trademarks or
registered trademarks of LSI Logic Corp.

M-Systems and DiskOnChip are trademarks or registered trademarks of
M-Systems Flash Disk Pioneers, Ltd.

Macromedia, Flash, and Shockwave are trademarks or registered trademarks
of Macromedia, Inc. in the United States and/or other countries.

Microsoft, IntelliMouse, MS-DOS, Outlook, Windows, Windows Media and
Windows NT are either registered trademarks or trademarks of Microsoft
Corporation in the United States and/or other countries.

Netscape and the Netscape Navigator are registered trademarks of
Netscape Communications Corporation in the U.S. and other countries.

GateD and NextHop are registered and unregistered trademarks of NextHop
in the U.S. and other countries.

Motif, OSF/1, and UNIX are registered trademarks and IT DialTone and The
Open Group are trademarks of The Open Group in the United States and
other countries.

Oracle is a registered trademark of Oracle Corporation.

PowerQuest and PartitionMagic are registered trademarks of PowerQuest
Corporation in the United States and/or other countries.

RealNetworks, RealPlayer, and RealAudio are the registered trademarks of
RealNetworks, Inc.

Red Hat, RPM, are trademarks or registered trademarks of Red Hat, Inc.
in the United States and other countries.

SAP, R/3, and mySAP are trademarks or registered trademarks of SAP AG in
Germany and in several other countries all over the world.

Sun, Sun Microsystems, Java, Java Virtual Machine, JDK, JRE, JSP, JVM,
Netra, Solaris, StarOffice and SunOS are trademarks or registered
trademarks of Sun Microsystems, Inc. in the United States and other
countries.

Symantec and Ghost are registered trademarks of Symantec Corporation in
the United States and other countries.

MATLAB is a registered trademark of The MathWorks, Inc.

SpeedTouch is a trademark of Thomson.

U.S. Robotics and Sportster are registered trademarks of U.S. Robotics
Corporation.

VMware is a trademark of VMware, Inc.

Waterloo Maple and Maple are trademarks or registered trademarks of
Waterloo Maple Inc.

Mathematica is a registered trademark of Wolfram Research, Inc.

XFree86 is a trademark of The XFree86 Project, Inc.

Ogg Vorbis and Xiph.Org are trademarks of Xiph.Org.

Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to
distinguish their products are claimed as trademarks. Where those
designations appear in this document, and the FreeBSD Project was aware
of the trademark claim, the designations have been followed by the “™”
or the “?” symbol.

.. raw:: html

   </div>
