===========================
6.?How to submit a question
===========================

.. raw:: html

   <div class="navheader">

6.?How to submit a question
`Prev <ar01s05.html>`__?
?
?\ `Next <ar01s07.html>`__

--------------

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="sect1">

.. raw:: html

   <div class="titlepage" xmlns="">

.. raw:: html

   <div>

.. raw:: html

   <div>

6.?How to submit a question
---------------------------

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

When submitting a question to FreeBSD-questions, consider the following
points:

.. raw:: html

   <div class="itemizedlist">

-  Remember that nobody gets paid for answering a FreeBSD question. They
   do it of their own free will. You can influence this free will
   positively by submitting a well-formulated question supplying as much
   relevant information as possible. You can influence this free will
   negatively by submitting an incomplete, illegible, or rude question.
   It is perfectly possible to send a message to FreeBSD-questions and
   not get an answer even if you follow these rules. It is much more
   possible to not get an answer if you do not. In the rest of this
   document, we will look at how to get the most out of your question to
   FreeBSD-questions.

-  Not everybody who answers FreeBSD questions reads every message: they
   look at the subject line and decide whether it interests them.
   Clearly, it is in your interest to specify a subject. “FreeBSD
   problem” or “Help” are not enough. If you provide no subject at all,
   many people will not bother reading it. If your subject is not
   specific enough, the people who can answer it may not read it.

-  Format your message so that it is legible, and PLEASE DO NOT
   SHOUT!!!!!. We appreciate that a lot of people do not speak English
   as their first language, and we try to make allowances for that, but
   it is really painful to try to read a message written full of typos
   or without any line breaks.

   Do not underestimate the effect that a poorly formatted mail message
   has, not just on the FreeBSD-questions mailing list. Your mail
   message is all people see of you, and if it is poorly formatted, one
   line per paragraph, badly spelt, or full of errors, it will give
   people a poor impression of you.

   A lot of badly formatted messages come from `bad mailers or badly
   configured mailers <http://www.lemis.com/email.html>`__. The
   following mailers are known to send out badly formatted messages
   without you finding out about them:

   .. raw:: html

      <div class="itemizedlist">

   -  Eudora?

   -  exmh

   -  Microsoft? Exchange

   -  Microsoft? Outlook?

   .. raw:: html

      </div>

   Try not to use MIME: a lot of people use mailers which do not get on
   very well with MIME.

-  Make sure your time and time zone are set correctly. This may seem a
   little silly, since your message still gets there, but many of the
   people you are trying to reach get several hundred messages a day.
   They frequently sort the incoming messages by subject and by date,
   and if your message does not come before the first answer, they may
   assume they missed it and not bother to look.

-  Do not include unrelated questions in the same message. Firstly, a
   long message tends to scare people off, and secondly, it is more
   difficult to get all the people who can answer all the questions to
   read the message.

-  Specify as much information as possible. This is a difficult area,
   and we need to expand on what information you need to submit, but
   here is a start:

   .. raw:: html

      <div class="itemizedlist">

   -  In nearly every case, it is important to know the version of
      FreeBSD you are running. This is particularly the case for
      FreeBSD-CURRENT, where you should also specify the date of the
      sources, though of course you should not be sending questions
      about -CURRENT to FreeBSD-questions.

   -  With any problem which *could* be hardware related, tell us about
      your hardware. In case of doubt, assume it is possible that it is
      hardware. What kind of CPU are you using? How fast? What
      motherboard? How much memory? What peripherals?

      There is a judgement call here, of course, but the output of the
      `dmesg(8) <http://www.FreeBSD.org/cgi/man.cgi?query=dmesg&sektion=8>`__
      command can frequently be very useful, since it tells not just
      what hardware you are running, but what version of FreeBSD as
      well.

   -  If you get error messages, do not say “I get error messages”, say
      (for example) “I get the error message 'No route to host'”.

   -  If your system panics, do not say “My system panicked”, say (for
      example) “my system panicked with the message 'free vnode isn't'”.

   -  If you have difficulty installing FreeBSD, please tell us what
      hardware you have. In particular, it is important to know the IRQs
      and I/O addresses of the boards installed in your machine.

   -  If you have difficulty getting PPP to run, describe the
      configuration. Which version of PPP do you use? What kind of
      authentication do you have? Do you have a static or dynamic IP
      address? What kind of messages do you get in the log file?

   .. raw:: html

      </div>

-  A lot of the information you need to supply is the output of
   programs, such as
   `dmesg(8) <http://www.FreeBSD.org/cgi/man.cgi?query=dmesg&sektion=8>`__,
   or console messages, which usually appear in ``/var/log/messages``.
   Do not try to copy this information by typing it in again; it is a
   real pain, and you are bound to make a mistake. To send log file
   contents, either make a copy of the file and use an editor to trim
   the information to what is relevant, or cut and paste into your
   message. For the output of programs like
   `dmesg(8) <http://www.FreeBSD.org/cgi/man.cgi?query=dmesg&sektion=8>`__,
   redirect the output to a file and include that. For example,

   .. code:: screen

       % dmesg > /tmp/dmesg.out

   This redirects the information to the file ``/tmp/dmesg.out``.

-  If you do all this, and you still do not get an answer, there could
   be other reasons. For example, the problem is so complicated that
   nobody knows the answer, or the person who does know the answer was
   offline. If you do not get an answer after, say, a week, it might
   help to re-send the message. If you do not get an answer to your
   second message, though, you are probably not going to get one from
   this forum. Resending the same message again and again will only make
   you unpopular.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

To summarize, let's assume you know the answer to the following question
(yes, it is the same one in each case). You choose which of these two
questions you would be more prepared to answer:

.. raw:: html

   <div class="example">

.. raw:: html

   <div class="example-title">

Example?1.?Message 1

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="example-contents">

.. code:: literallayout

    Subject: HELP!!?!??
    I just can't get hits damn silly FereBSD system to
    workd, and Im really good at this tsuff, but I have never seen
    anythign sho difficult to install, it jst wont work whatever I try
    so why don't you guys tell me what I doing wrong.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="example">

.. raw:: html

   <div class="example-title">

Example?2.?Message 2

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="example-contents">

.. code:: literallayout

    Subject: Problems installing FreeBSD

    I've just got the FreeBSD 2.1.5 CDROM from Walnut Creek, and I'm having a lot
    of difficulty installing it.  I have a 66 MHz 486 with 16 MB of
    memory and an Adaptec 1540A SCSI board, a 1.2GB Quantum Fireball
    disk and a Toshiba 3501XA CDROM drive.  The installation works just
    fine, but when I try to reboot the system, I get the message
    “Missing Operating System”.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="navfooter">

--------------

+------------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| `Prev <ar01s05.html>`__?           | ?                       | ?\ `Next <ar01s07.html>`__           |
+------------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| 5.?Before submitting a question?   | `Home <index.html>`__   | ?7.?How to follow up to a question   |
+------------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------------------+

.. raw:: html

   </div>

All FreeBSD documents are available for download at
http://ftp.FreeBSD.org/pub/FreeBSD/doc/

| Questions that are not answered by the
  `documentation <http://www.FreeBSD.org/docs.html>`__ may be sent to
  <freebsd-questions@FreeBSD.org\ >.
|  Send questions about this document to <freebsd-doc@FreeBSD.org\ >.
