============
Legal Notice
============

.. raw:: html

   <div class="legalnotice">

FreeBSD is a registered trademark of the FreeBSD Foundation.

Adobe, Acrobat, Acrobat Reader, Flash and PostScript are either
registered trademarks or trademarks of Adobe Systems Incorporated in the
United States and/or other countries.

IBM, AIX, OS/2, PowerPC, PS/2, S/390, and ThinkPad are trademarks of
International Business Machines Corporation in the United States, other
countries, or both.

IEEE, POSIX, and 802 are registered trademarks of Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. in the United States.

Intel, Celeron, Centrino, Core, EtherExpress, i386, i486, Itanium,
Pentium, and Xeon are trademarks or registered trademarks of Intel
Corporation or its subsidiaries in the United States and other
countries.

Linux is a registered trademark of Linus Torvalds.

Microsoft, IntelliMouse, MS-DOS, Outlook, Windows, Windows Media and
Windows NT are either registered trademarks or trademarks of Microsoft
Corporation in the United States and/or other countries.

NetBSD is a registered trademark of the NetBSD Foundation.

Motif, OSF/1, and UNIX are registered trademarks and IT DialTone and The
Open Group are trademarks of The Open Group in the United States and
other countries.

Silicon Graphics, SGI, and OpenGL are registered trademarks of Silicon
Graphics, Inc., in the United States and/or other countries worldwide.

Sun, Sun Microsystems, Java, Java Virtual Machine, JDK, JRE, JSP, JVM,
Netra, OpenJDK, Solaris, StarOffice, SunOS and VirtualBox are trademarks
or registered trademarks of Sun Microsystems, Inc. in the United States
and other countries.

Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to
distinguish their products are claimed as trademarks. Where those
designations appear in this document, and the FreeBSD Project was aware
of the trademark claim, the designations have been followed by the “™”
or the “?” symbol.

.. raw:: html

   </div>
