================================================================
Chapter?4.?Localization and Internationalization - L10N and I18N
================================================================

.. raw:: html

   <div class="navheader">

Chapter?4.?Localization and Internationalization - L10N and I18N
`Prev <secure-race-conditions.html>`__?
Part?I.?Basics
?\ `Next <posix-nls.html>`__

--------------

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="chapter">

.. raw:: html

   <div class="titlepage" xmlns="">

.. raw:: html

   <div>

.. raw:: html

   <div>

Chapter?4.?Localization and Internationalization - L10N and I18N
----------------------------------------------------------------

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="toc">

.. raw:: html

   <div class="toc-title">

Table of Contents

.. raw:: html

   </div>

`4.1. Programming I18N Compliant
Applications <l10n.html#l10n-programming>`__
`4.2. Localized Messages with POSIX.1 Native Language Support
(NLS) <posix-nls.html>`__

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="sect1">

.. raw:: html

   <div class="titlepage" xmlns="">

.. raw:: html

   <div>

.. raw:: html

   <div>

4.1.?Programming I18N Compliant Applications
--------------------------------------------

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

To make your application more useful for speakers of other languages, we
hope that you will program I18N compliant. The GNU gcc compiler and GUI
libraries like QT and GTK support I18N through special handling of
strings. Making a program I18N compliant is very easy. It allows
contributors to port your application to other languages quickly. Refer
to the library specific I18N documentation for more details.

In contrast with common perception, I18N compliant code is easy to
write. Usually, it only involves wrapping your strings with library
specific functions. In addition, please be sure to allow for wide or
multibyte character support.

.. raw:: html

   <div class="sect2">

.. raw:: html

   <div class="titlepage" xmlns="">

.. raw:: html

   <div>

.. raw:: html

   <div>

4.1.1.?A Call to Unify the I18N Effort
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

It has come to our attention that the individual I18N/L10N efforts for
each country has been repeating each others' efforts. Many of us have
been reinventing the wheel repeatedly and inefficiently. We hope that
the various major groups in I18N could congregate into a group effort
similar to the Core Team's responsibility.

Currently, we hope that, when you write or port I18N programs, you would
send it out to each country's related FreeBSD mailing list for testing.
In the future, we hope to create applications that work in all the
languages out-of-the-box without dirty hacks.

The `FreeBSD internationalization mailing
list <http://lists.FreeBSD.org/mailman/listinfo/freebsd-i18n>`__ has
been established. If you are an I18N/L10N developer, please send your
comments, ideas, questions, and anything you deem related to it.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="sect2">

.. raw:: html

   <div class="titlepage" xmlns="">

.. raw:: html

   <div>

.. raw:: html

   <div>

4.1.2.?Perl and Python
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

Perl and Python have I18N and wide character handling libraries. Please
use them for I18N compliance.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="navfooter">

--------------

+-------------------------------------------+-------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| `Prev <secure-race-conditions.html>`__?   | `Up <Basics.html>`__    | ?\ `Next <posix-nls.html>`__                                          |
+-------------------------------------------+-------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 3.7.?Race Conditions?                     | `Home <index.html>`__   | ?4.2.?Localized Messages with POSIX.1 Native Language Support (NLS)   |
+-------------------------------------------+-------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

.. raw:: html

   </div>

All FreeBSD documents are available for download at
http://ftp.FreeBSD.org/pub/FreeBSD/doc/

| Questions that are not answered by the
  `documentation <http://www.FreeBSD.org/docs.html>`__ may be sent to
  <freebsd-questions@FreeBSD.org\ >.
|  Send questions about this document to <freebsd-doc@FreeBSD.org\ >.
