============
Legal Notice
============

.. raw:: html

   <div class="legalnotice">

FreeBSD is a registered trademark of the FreeBSD Foundation.

AMD, AMD Athlon, AMD Opteron, AMD Phenom, AMD Sempron, AMD Turion,
Athlon, ?lan, Opteron, and PCnet are trademarks of Advanced Micro
Devices, Inc.

Apple, AirPort, FireWire, iMac, iPhone, iPad, Mac, Macintosh, Mac OS,
Quicktime, and TrueType are trademarks of Apple Inc., registered in the
U.S. and other countries.

Intel, Celeron, Centrino, Core, EtherExpress, i386, i486, Itanium,
Pentium, and Xeon are trademarks or registered trademarks of Intel
Corporation or its subsidiaries in the United States and other
countries.

Linux is a registered trademark of Linus Torvalds.

Motif, OSF/1, and UNIX are registered trademarks and IT DialTone and The
Open Group are trademarks of The Open Group in the United States and
other countries.

SPARC, SPARC64, and UltraSPARC are trademarks of SPARC International,
Inc in the United States and other countries. SPARC International, Inc
owns all of the SPARC trademarks and under licensing agreements allows
the proper use of these trademarks by its members.

Sun, Sun Microsystems, Java, Java Virtual Machine, JDK, JRE, JSP, JVM,
Netra, OpenJDK, Solaris, StarOffice, SunOS and VirtualBox are trademarks
or registered trademarks of Sun Microsystems, Inc. in the United States
and other countries.

UNIX is a registered trademark of The Open Group in the United States
and other countries.

Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to
distinguish their products are claimed as trademarks. Where those
designations appear in this document, and the FreeBSD Project was aware
of the trademark claim, the designations have been followed by the “™”
or the “?” symbol.

.. raw:: html

   </div>
