====================
2.?How to Contribute
====================

.. raw:: html

   <div class="navheader">

2.?How to Contribute
`Prev <index.html>`__?
?
?\ `Next <ports-contributing.html>`__

--------------

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="sect1">

.. raw:: html

   <div class="titlepage" xmlns="">

.. raw:: html

   <div>

.. raw:: html

   <div>

2.?How to Contribute
--------------------

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

Contributions to the system generally fall into one or more of the
following 5 categories:

.. raw:: html

   <div class="sect2">

.. raw:: html

   <div class="titlepage" xmlns="">

.. raw:: html

   <div>

.. raw:: html

   <div>

2.1.?Bug Reports and General Commentary
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

An idea or suggestion of *general* technical interest should be mailed
to the `FreeBSD technical discussions mailing
list <http://lists.FreeBSD.org/mailman/listinfo/freebsd-hackers>`__.
Likewise, people with an interest in such things (and a tolerance for a
*high* volume of mail!) may subscribe to the `FreeBSD technical
discussions mailing
list <http://lists.FreeBSD.org/mailman/listinfo/freebsd-hackers>`__. See
`The FreeBSD
Handbook <../../../../doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/books/handbook/eresources.html#ERESOURCES-MAIL>`__
for more information about this and other mailing lists.

If you find a bug or are submitting a specific change, please report it
using the `bug submission form <https://bugs.FreeBSD.org/submit/>`__.
Try to fill-in each field of the bug report. Unless they exceed 65KB,
include any patches directly in the report. If the patch is suitable to
be applied to the source tree put ``[PATCH]`` in the synopsis of the
report. When including patches, *do not* use cut-and-paste because
cut-and-paste turns tabs into spaces and makes them unusable. When
patches are a lot larger than 20KB, consider compressing them (eg. with
`gzip(1) <http://www.FreeBSD.org/cgi/man.cgi?query=gzip&sektion=1>`__ or
`bzip2(1) <http://www.FreeBSD.org/cgi/man.cgi?query=bzip2&sektion=1>`__)
prior to uploading them.

After filing a report, you should receive confirmation along with a
tracking number. Keep this tracking number so that you can update us
with details about the problem.

See also `this
article <../../../../doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/articles/problem-reports/article.html>`__
on how to write good problem reports.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="sect2">

.. raw:: html

   <div class="titlepage" xmlns="">

.. raw:: html

   <div>

.. raw:: html

   <div>

2.2.?Changes to the Documentation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

Changes to the documentation are overseen by the `FreeBSD documentation
project mailing
list <http://lists.FreeBSD.org/mailman/listinfo/freebsd-doc>`__. Please
look at the `FreeBSD Documentation Project
Primer <../../../../doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/books/fdp-primer/index.html>`__
for complete instructions. Send submissions and changes (even small ones
are welcome!) using the same method any other bug report.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="sect2">

.. raw:: html

   <div class="titlepage" xmlns="">

.. raw:: html

   <div>

.. raw:: html

   <div>

2.3.?Changes to Existing Source Code
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

An addition or change to the existing source code is a somewhat trickier
affair and depends a lot on how far out of date you are with the current
state of FreeBSD development. There is a special on-going release of
FreeBSD known as “FreeBSD-CURRENT” which is made available in a variety
of ways for the convenience of developers working actively on the
system. See `The FreeBSD
Handbook <../../../../doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/books/handbook/current-stable.html>`__
for more information about getting and using FreeBSD-CURRENT.

Working from older sources unfortunately means that your changes may
sometimes be too obsolete or too divergent for easy re-integration into
FreeBSD. Chances of this can be minimized somewhat by subscribing to the
`FreeBSD announcements mailing
list <http://lists.FreeBSD.org/mailman/listinfo/freebsd-announce>`__ and
the `FreeBSD-CURRENT mailing
list <http://lists.FreeBSD.org/mailman/listinfo/freebsd-current>`__
lists, where discussions on the current state of the system take place.

Assuming that you can manage to secure fairly up-to-date sources to base
your changes on, the next step is to produce a set of diffs to send to
the FreeBSD maintainers. This is done with the
`diff(1) <http://www.FreeBSD.org/cgi/man.cgi?query=diff&sektion=1>`__
command.

The preferred
`diff(1) <http://www.FreeBSD.org/cgi/man.cgi?query=diff&sektion=1>`__
format for submitting patches is the unified output format generated by
``diff -u``.

.. code:: screen

    % diff -u oldfile newfile

or

.. code:: screen

    % diff -u -r -N olddir newdir

would generate a set of unified diffs for the given source file or
directory hierarchy.

See
`diff(1) <http://www.FreeBSD.org/cgi/man.cgi?query=diff&sektion=1>`__
for more information.

Once you have a set of diffs (which you may test with the
`patch(1) <http://www.FreeBSD.org/cgi/man.cgi?query=patch&sektion=1>`__
command), you should submit them for inclusion with FreeBSD as a bug
report. *Do not* just send the diffs to the `FreeBSD technical
discussions mailing
list <http://lists.FreeBSD.org/mailman/listinfo/freebsd-hackers>`__ or
they will get lost! We greatly appreciate your submission (this is a
volunteer project!); because we are busy, we may not be able to address
it immediately, but it will remain in the PR database until we do.
Indicate your submission by including ``[PATCH]`` in the synopsis of the
report.

If you feel it appropriate (e.g. you have added, deleted, or renamed
files), bundle your changes into a ``tar`` file. Archives created with
`shar(1) <http://www.FreeBSD.org/cgi/man.cgi?query=shar&sektion=1>`__
are also welcome.

If your change is of a potentially sensitive nature, such as if you are
unsure of copyright issues governing its further distribution then you
should send it to Core Team ``<core@FreeBSD.org>`` directly rather than
submitting as a bug report. The Core Team ``<core@FreeBSD.org>`` reaches
a much smaller group of people who do much of the day-to-day work on
FreeBSD. Note that this group is also *very busy* and so you should only
send mail to them where it is truly necessary.

Please refer to
`intro(9) <http://www.FreeBSD.org/cgi/man.cgi?query=intro&sektion=9>`__
and
`style(9) <http://www.FreeBSD.org/cgi/man.cgi?query=style&sektion=9>`__
for some information on coding style. We would appreciate it if you were
at least aware of this information before submitting code.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="sect2">

.. raw:: html

   <div class="titlepage" xmlns="">

.. raw:: html

   <div>

.. raw:: html

   <div>

2.4.?New Code or Major Value-Added Packages
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

In the case of a significant contribution of a large body work, or the
addition of an important new feature to FreeBSD, it becomes almost
always necessary to either send changes as tar files or upload them to a
web or FTP site for other people to access. If you do not have access to
a web or FTP site, ask on an appropriate FreeBSD mailing list for
someone to host the changes for you.

When working with large amounts of code, the touchy subject of
copyrights also invariably comes up. FreeBSD prefers free software
licenses such as BSD or ISC. Copyleft licenses such as GPLv2 are
sometimes permitted. The complete listing can be found on the `core team
licensing policy <../../../../internal/software-license.html>`__ page.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="sect2">

.. raw:: html

   <div class="titlepage" xmlns="">

.. raw:: html

   <div>

.. raw:: html

   <div>

2.5.?Money or Hardware
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

We are always very happy to accept donations to further the cause of the
FreeBSD Project and, in a volunteer effort like ours, a little can go a
long way! Donations of hardware are also very important to expanding our
list of supported peripherals since we generally lack the funds to buy
such items ourselves.

.. raw:: html

   <div class="sect3">

.. raw:: html

   <div class="titlepage" xmlns="">

.. raw:: html

   <div>

.. raw:: html

   <div>

2.5.1.?Donating Funds
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

The FreeBSD Foundation is a non-profit, tax-exempt foundation
established to further the goals of the FreeBSD Project. As a 501(c)3
entity, the Foundation is generally exempt from US federal income tax as
well as Colorado State income tax. Donations to a tax-exempt entity are
often deductible from taxable federal income.

Donations may be sent in check form to:

.. raw:: html

   <div class="address">

| 
|  ????The?FreeBSD?Foundation
|  ????P.O.?Box?20247,
|  ????Boulder,
|  ????CO?80308
|  ????USA
|  ??

.. raw:: html

   </div>

The FreeBSD Foundation is now able to accept donations through the web
with PayPal. To place a donation, please visit the Foundation `web
site <http://www.freebsdfoundation.org>`__.

More information about the FreeBSD Foundation can be found in `The
FreeBSD Foundation -- an
Introduction <http://people.FreeBSD.org/~jdp/foundation/announcement.html>`__.
To contact the Foundation by email, write to
``<bod@FreeBSDFoundation.org>``.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="sect3">

.. raw:: html

   <div class="titlepage" xmlns="">

.. raw:: html

   <div>

.. raw:: html

   <div>

2.5.2.?Donating Hardware
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

The FreeBSD Project happily accepts donations of hardware that it can
find good use for. If you are interested in donating hardware, please
contact the `Donations Liaison Office <../../../../donations/>`__.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="navfooter">

--------------

+----------------------------+-------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| `Prev <index.html>`__?     | ?                       | ?\ `Next <ports-contributing.html>`__   |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| Contributing to FreeBSD?   | `Home <index.html>`__   | ?3.?Contributing to ports               |
+----------------------------+-------------------------+-----------------------------------------+

.. raw:: html

   </div>

All FreeBSD documents are available for download at
http://ftp.FreeBSD.org/pub/FreeBSD/doc/

| Questions that are not answered by the
  `documentation <http://www.FreeBSD.org/docs.html>`__ may be sent to
  <freebsd-questions@FreeBSD.org\ >.
|  Send questions about this document to <freebsd-doc@FreeBSD.org\ >.
