==================
10.?BSD Advantages
==================

.. raw:: html

   <div class="navheader">

10.?BSD Advantages
`Prev <gpl-advantages.html>`__?
?
?\ `Next <recommendations.html>`__

--------------

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="sect1">

.. raw:: html

   <div class="titlepage" xmlns="">

.. raw:: html

   <div>

.. raw:: html

   <div>

10.?BSD Advantages
------------------

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

A BSD style license is a good choice for long duration research or other
projects that need a development environment that:

.. raw:: html

   <div class="itemizedlist">

-  has near zero cost

-  will evolve over a long period of time

-  permits anyone to retain the option of commercializing final results
   with minimal legal issues.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

This final consideration may often be the dominant one, as it was when
the Apache project decided upon its license:

“This type of license is ideal for promoting the use of a reference body
of code that implements a protocol for common service. This is another
reason why we choose it for the Apache group - many of us wanted to see
HTTP survive and become a true multiparty standard, and would not have
minded in the slightest if Microsoft or Netscape choose to incorporate
our HTTP engine or any other component of our code into their products,
if it helped further the goal of keeping HTTP common... All this means
that, strategically speaking, the project needs to maintain sufficient
momentum, and that participants realize greater value by contributing
their code to the project, even code that would have had value if kept
proprietary.”

Developers tend to find the BSD license attractive as it keeps legal
issues out of the way and lets them do whatever they want with the code.
In contrast, those who expect primarily to use a system rather than
program it, or expect others to evolve the code, or who do not expect to
make a living from their work associated with the system (such as
government employees), find the GPL attractive, because it forces code
developed by others to be given to them and keeps their employer from
retaining copyright and thus potentially "burying" or orphaning the
software. If you want to force your competitors to help you, the GPL is
attractive.

A BSD license is not simply a gift. The question “why should we help our
competitors or let them steal our work?” comes up often in relation to a
BSD license. Under a BSD license, if one company came to dominate a
product niche that others considered strategic, the other companies can,
with minimal effort, form a mini-consortium aimed at reestablishing
parity by contributing to a competitive BSD variant that increases
market competition and fairness. This permits each company to believe
that it will be able to profit from some advantage it can provide, while
also contributing to economic flexibility and efficiency. The more
rapidly and easily the cooperating members can do this, the more
successful they will be. A BSD license is essentially a minimally
complicated license that enables such behavior.

A key effect of the GPL, making a complete and competitive Open Source
system widely available at cost of media, is a reasonable goal. A BSD
style license, in conjunction with ad-hoc-consortiums of individuals,
can achieve this goal without destroying the economic assumptions built
around the deployment-end of the technology transfer pipeline.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="navfooter">

--------------

+----------------------------------------+-------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| `Prev <gpl-advantages.html>`__?        | ?                       | ?\ `Next <recommendations.html>`__                      |
+----------------------------------------+-------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.?GPL Advantages and Disadvantages?   | `Home <index.html>`__   | ?11.?Specific Recommendations for using a BSD license   |
+----------------------------------------+-------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+

.. raw:: html

   </div>

All FreeBSD documents are available for download at
http://ftp.FreeBSD.org/pub/FreeBSD/doc/

| Questions that are not answered by the
  `documentation <http://www.FreeBSD.org/docs.html>`__ may be sent to
  <freebsd-questions@FreeBSD.org\ >.
|  Send questions about this document to <freebsd-doc@FreeBSD.org\ >.
