======================================
4.?Building a File System from Scratch
======================================

.. raw:: html

   <div class="navheader">

4.?Building a File System from Scratch
`Prev <ro-fs.html>`__?
?
?\ `Next <strategies.html>`__

--------------

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="sect1">

.. raw:: html

   <div class="titlepage" xmlns="">

.. raw:: html

   <div>

.. raw:: html

   <div>

4.?Building a File System from Scratch
--------------------------------------

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

Because ATA compatible compact-flash cards are seen by FreeBSD as normal
IDE hard drives, you could theoretically install FreeBSD from the
network using the kern and mfsroot floppies or from a CD.

However, even a small installation of FreeBSD using normal installation
procedures can produce a system in size of greater than 200 megabytes.
Because most people will be using smaller flash memory devices (128
megabytes is considered fairly large - 32 or even 16 megabytes is
common) an installation using normal mechanisms is not possible—there is
simply not enough disk space for even the smallest of conventional
installations.

The easiest way to overcome this space limitation is to install FreeBSD
using conventional means to a normal hard disk. After the installation
is complete, pare down the operating system to a size that will fit onto
your flash media, then tar the entire filesystem. The following steps
will guide you through the process of preparing a piece of flash memory
for your tarred filesystem. Remember, because a normal installation is
not being performed, operations such as partitioning, labeling,
file-system creation, etc. need to be performed by hand. In addition to
the kern and mfsroot floppy disks, you will also need to use the fixit
floppy.

.. raw:: html

   <div class="procedure">

#. **Partitioning Your Flash Media Device**

   After booting with the kern and mfsroot floppies, choose ``custom``
   from the installation menu. In the custom installation menu, choose
   ``partition``. In the partition menu, you should delete all existing
   partitions using **d**. After deleting all existing partitions,
   create a partition using **c** and accept the default value for the
   size of the partition. When asked for the type of the partition, make
   sure the value is set to ``165``. Now write this partition table to
   the disk by pressing **w** (this is a hidden option on this screen).
   If you are using an ATA compatible compact flash card, you should
   choose the FreeBSD Boot Manager. Now press **q** to quit the
   partition menu. You will be shown the boot manager menu once more -
   repeat the choice you made earlier.

#. **Creating Filesystems on Your Flash Memory Device**

   Exit the custom installation menu, and from the main installation
   menu choose the ``fixit`` option. After entering the fixit
   environment, enter the following command:

   .. code:: screen

       # disklabel -e /dev/ad0c

   At this point you will have entered the vi editor under the auspices
   of the disklabel command. Next, you need to add an ``a:`` line at the
   end of the file. This ``a:`` line should look like:

   .. code:: programlisting

       a:      123456  0       4.2BSD  0       0

   Where *``123456``* is a number that is exactly the same as the number
   in the existing ``c:`` entry for size. Basically you are duplicating
   the existing ``c:`` line as an ``a:`` line, making sure that fstype
   is ``4.2BSD``. Save the file and exit.

   .. code:: screen

       # disklabel -B -r /dev/ad0c
       # newfs /dev/ad0a

#. **Placing Your Filesystem on the Flash Media**

   Mount the newly prepared flash media:

   .. code:: screen

       # mount /dev/ad0a /flash

   Bring this machine up on the network so we may transfer our tar file
   and explode it onto our flash media filesystem. One example of how to
   do this is:

   .. code:: screen

       # ifconfig xl0 192.168.0.10 netmask 255.255.255.0
       # route add default 192.168.0.1

   Now that the machine is on the network, transfer your tar file. You
   may be faced with a bit of a dilemma at this point - if your flash
   memory part is 128 megabytes, for instance, and your tar file is
   larger than 64 megabytes, you cannot have your tar file on the flash
   media at the same time as you explode it - you will run out of space.
   One solution to this problem, if you are using FTP, is to untar the
   file while it is transferred over FTP. If you perform your transfer
   in this manner, you will never have the tar file and the tar contents
   on your disk at the same time:

   .. code:: screen

       ftp> get tarfile.tar "| tar xvf -"

   If your tarfile is gzipped, you can accomplish this as well:

   .. code:: screen

       ftp> get tarfile.tar "| zcat | tar xvf -"

   After the contents of your tarred filesystem are on your flash memory
   filesystem, you can unmount the flash memory and reboot:

   .. code:: screen

       # cd /
       # umount /flash
       # exit

   Assuming that you configured your filesystem correctly when it was
   built on the normal hard disk (with your filesystems mounted
   read-only, and with the necessary options compiled into the kernel)
   you should now be successfully booting your FreeBSD embedded system.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="navfooter">

--------------

+------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| `Prev <ro-fs.html>`__?                               | ?                       | ?\ `Next <strategies.html>`__                                |
+------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| 3.?The ``rc`` Subsystem and Read-Only Filesystems?   | `Home <index.html>`__   | ?5.?System Strategies for Small and Read Only Environments   |
+------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+

.. raw:: html

   </div>

All FreeBSD documents are available for download at
http://ftp.FreeBSD.org/pub/FreeBSD/doc/

| Questions that are not answered by the
  `documentation <http://www.FreeBSD.org/docs.html>`__ may be sent to
  <freebsd-questions@FreeBSD.org\ >.
|  Send questions about this document to <freebsd-doc@FreeBSD.org\ >.
