=============================================
Chapter?11.?x86 Assembly Language Programming
=============================================

.. raw:: html

   <div class="navheader">

Chapter?11.?x86 Assembly Language Programming
`Prev <architectures.html>`__?
Part?IV.?Architectures
?\ `Next <x86-the-tools.html>`__

--------------

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="chapter">

.. raw:: html

   <div class="titlepage" xmlns="">

.. raw:: html

   <div>

.. raw:: html

   <div>

Chapter?11.?x86 Assembly Language Programming
---------------------------------------------

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="toc">

.. raw:: html

   <div class="toc-title">

Table of Contents

.. raw:: html

   </div>

`11.1. Synopsis <x86.html#x86-intro>`__
`11.2. The Tools <x86-the-tools.html>`__
`11.3. System Calls <x86-system-calls.html>`__
`11.4. Return Values <x86-return-values.html>`__
`11.5. Creating Portable Code <x86-portable-code.html>`__
`11.6. Our First Program <x86-first-program.html>`__
`11.7. Writing UNIX? Filters <x86-unix-filters.html>`__
`11.8. Buffered Input and Output <x86-buffered-io.html>`__
`11.9. Command Line Arguments <x86-command-line.html>`__
`11.10. UNIX? Environment <x86-environment.html>`__
`11.11. Working with Files <x86-files.html>`__
`11.12. One-Pointed Mind <x86-one-pointed-mind.html>`__
`11.13. Using the FPU <x86-fpu.html>`__
`11.14. Caveats <x86-caveats.html>`__
`11.15. Acknowledgements <x86-acknowledgements.html>`__

.. raw:: html

   </div>

 *This chapter was written by G. Adam Stanislav
``<adam@redprince.net>``.*

.. raw:: html

   <div class="sect1">

.. raw:: html

   <div class="titlepage" xmlns="">

.. raw:: html

   <div>

.. raw:: html

   <div>

11.1.?Synopsis
--------------

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

Assembly language programming under UNIX? is highly undocumented. It is
generally assumed that no one would ever want to use it because various
UNIX? systems run on different microprocessors, so everything should be
written in C for portability.

In reality, C portability is quite a myth. Even C programs need to be
modified when ported from one UNIX? to another, regardless of what
processor each runs on. Typically, such a program is full of conditional
statements depending on the system it is compiled for.

Even if we believe that all of UNIX? software should be written in C, or
some other high-level language, we still need assembly language
programmers: Who else would write the section of C library that accesses
the kernel?

In this chapter I will attempt to show you how you can use assembly
language writing UNIX? programs, specifically under FreeBSD.

This chapter does not explain the basics of assembly language. There are
enough resources about that (for a complete online course in assembly
language, see Randall Hyde's `Art of Assembly
Language <http://webster.cs.ucr.edu/>`__; or if you prefer a printed
book, take a look at Jeff Duntemann's `Assembly Language
Step-by-Step <http://www.int80h.org/cgi-bin/isbn?isbn=0471375233>`__).
However, once the chapter is finished, any assembly language programmer
will be able to write programs for FreeBSD quickly and efficiently.

Copyright ? 2000-2001 G. Adam Stanislav. All rights reserved.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="navfooter">

--------------

+----------------------------------+-------------------------------+------------------------------------+
| `Prev <architectures.html>`__?   | `Up <architectures.html>`__   | ?\ `Next <x86-the-tools.html>`__   |
+----------------------------------+-------------------------------+------------------------------------+
| Part?IV.?Architectures?          | `Home <index.html>`__         | ?11.2.?The Tools                   |
+----------------------------------+-------------------------------+------------------------------------+

.. raw:: html

   </div>

All FreeBSD documents are available for download at
http://ftp.FreeBSD.org/pub/FreeBSD/doc/

| Questions that are not answered by the
  `documentation <http://www.FreeBSD.org/docs.html>`__ may be sent to
  <freebsd-questions@FreeBSD.org\ >.
|  Send questions about this document to <freebsd-doc@FreeBSD.org\ >.
