==============================
Chapter?6.?The X Window System
==============================

.. raw:: html

   <div class="navheader">

Chapter?6.?The X Window System
`Prev <ports-broken.html>`__?
Part?I.?Getting Started
?\ `Next <x-understanding.html>`__

--------------

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="chapter">

.. raw:: html

   <div class="titlepage" xmlns="">

.. raw:: html

   <div>

.. raw:: html

   <div>

Chapter?6.?The X Window System
------------------------------

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="toc">

.. raw:: html

   <div class="toc-title">

Table of Contents

.. raw:: html

   </div>

`6.1. Synopsis <x11.html#x11-synopsis>`__
`6.2. Terminology <x-understanding.html>`__
`6.3. Installing Xorg <x-install.html>`__
`6.4. Quick Start <x-config-quick-start.html>`__
`6.5. Xorg Configuration <x-config.html>`__
`6.6. Using Fonts in Xorg <x-fonts.html>`__
`6.7. The X Display Manager <x-xdm.html>`__
`6.8. Desktop Environments <x11-wm.html>`__
`6.9. Installing Compiz Fusion <x-compiz-fusion.html>`__
`6.10. Troubleshooting <x11-understanding.html>`__

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="sect1">

.. raw:: html

   <div class="titlepage" xmlns="">

.. raw:: html

   <div>

.. raw:: html

   <div>

6.1.?Synopsis
-------------

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

An installation of FreeBSD using bsdinstall does not automatically
install a graphical user interface. This chapter describes how to
install and configure Xorg, which provides the open source X Window
System used to provide a graphical environment. It then describes how to
find and install a desktop environment or window manager.

.. raw:: html

   <div class="note" xmlns="">

Note:
~~~~~

Users who prefer an installation method that automatically configures
the Xorg and offers a choice of window managers during installation
should refer to the `pcbsd.org <http://www.pcbsd.org/>`__ website.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

For more information on the video hardware that Xorg supports, refer to
the `x.org <http://www.x.org/>`__ website.

After reading this chapter, you will know:

.. raw:: html

   <div class="itemizedlist">

-  The various components of the X Window System, and how they
   interoperate.

-  How to install and configure Xorg.

-  How to install and configure several window managers and desktop
   environments.

-  How to use TrueType? fonts in Xorg.

-  How to set up your system for graphical logins (XDM).

.. raw:: html

   </div>

Before reading this chapter, you should:

.. raw:: html

   <div class="itemizedlist">

-  Know how to install additional third-party software as described in
   `Chapter?5, *Installing Applications: Packages and
   Ports* <ports.html>`__.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="navfooter">

--------------

+-----------------------------------+---------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| `Prev <ports-broken.html>`__?     | `Up <getting-started.html>`__   | ?\ `Next <x-understanding.html>`__   |
+-----------------------------------+---------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| 5.8.?Dealing with Broken Ports?   | `Home <index.html>`__           | ?6.2.?Terminology                    |
+-----------------------------------+---------------------------------+--------------------------------------+

.. raw:: html

   </div>

All FreeBSD documents are available for download at
http://ftp.FreeBSD.org/pub/FreeBSD/doc/

| Questions that are not answered by the
  `documentation <http://www.FreeBSD.org/docs.html>`__ may be sent to
  <freebsd-questions@FreeBSD.org\ >.
|  Send questions about this document to <freebsd-doc@FreeBSD.org\ >.
