===========================
8.?How to answer a question
===========================

.. raw:: html

   <div class="navheader">

8.?How to answer a question
`Prev <ar01s07.html>`__?
?
?

--------------

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="sect1">

.. raw:: html

   <div class="titlepage" xmlns="">

.. raw:: html

   <div>

.. raw:: html

   <div>

8.?How to answer a question
---------------------------

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

Before you answer a question to FreeBSD-questions, consider:

.. raw:: html

   <div class="orderedlist">

#. A lot of the points on submitting questions also apply to answering
   questions. Read them.

#. Has somebody already answered the question? The easiest way to check
   this is to sort your incoming mail by subject: then (hopefully) you
   will see the question followed by any answers, all together.

   If somebody has already answered it, it does not automatically mean
   that you should not send another answer. But it makes sense to read
   all the other answers first.

#. Do you have something to contribute beyond what has already been
   said? In general, “Yeah, me too” answers do not help much, although
   there are exceptions, like when somebody is describing a problem they
   are having, and they do not know whether it is their fault or whether
   there is something wrong with the hardware or software. If you do
   send a “me too” answer, you should also include any further relevant
   information.

#. Are you sure you understand the question? Very frequently, the person
   who asks the question is confused or does not express themselves very
   well. Even with the best understanding of the system, it is easy to
   send a reply which does not answer the question. This does not help:
   you will leave the person who submitted the question more frustrated
   or confused than ever. If nobody else answers, and you are not too
   sure either, you can always ask for more information.

#. Are you sure your answer is correct? If not, wait a day or so. If
   nobody else comes up with a better answer, you can still reply and
   say, for example, “I do not know if this is correct, but since nobody
   else has replied, why don't you try replacing your ATAPI CDROM with a
   frog?”.

#. Unless there is a good reason to do otherwise, reply to the sender
   and to FreeBSD-questions. Many people on the FreeBSD-questions are
   “lurkers”: they learn by reading messages sent and replied to by
   others. If you take a message which is of general interest off the
   list, you are depriving these people of their information. Be careful
   with group replies; lots of people send messages with hundreds of
   CCs. If this is the case, be sure to trim the Cc: lines
   appropriately.

#. Include relevant text from the original message. Trim it to the
   minimum, but do not overdo it. It should still be possible for
   somebody who did not read the original message to understand what you
   are talking about.

#. Use some technique to identify which text came from the original
   message, and which text you add. I personally find that prepending
   “``> ``” to the original message works best. Leaving white space
   after the “``> ``” and leave empty lines between your text and the
   original text both make the result more readable.

#. Put your response in the correct place (after the text to which it
   replies). It is very difficult to read a thread of responses where
   each reply comes before the text to which it replies.

#. Most mailers change the subject line on a reply by prepending a text
   such as “Re: ”. If your mailer does not do it automatically, you
   should do it manually.

#. If the submitter did not abide by format conventions (lines too long,
   inappropriate subject line), *please* fix it. In the case of an
   incorrect subject line (such as “HELP!!??”), change the subject line
   to (say) “Re: Difficulties with sync PPP (was: HELP!!??)”. That way
   other people trying to follow the thread will have less difficulty
   following it.

   In such cases, it is appropriate to say what you did and why you did
   it, but try not to be rude. If you find you can not answer without
   being rude, do not answer.

   If you just want to reply to a message because of its bad format,
   just reply to the submitter, not to the list. You can just send him
   this message in reply, if you like.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="navfooter">

--------------

+--------------------------------------+-------------------------+-----+
| `Prev <ar01s07.html>`__?             | ?                       | ?   |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------+-----+
| 7.?How to follow up to a question?   | `Home <index.html>`__   | ?   |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------+-----+

.. raw:: html

   </div>

All FreeBSD documents are available for download at
http://ftp.FreeBSD.org/pub/FreeBSD/doc/

| Questions that are not answered by the
  `documentation <http://www.FreeBSD.org/docs.html>`__ may be sent to
  <freebsd-questions@FreeBSD.org\ >.
|  Send questions about this document to <freebsd-doc@FreeBSD.org\ >.
