===============================
5.?Before submitting a question
===============================

.. raw:: html

   <div class="navheader">

5.?Before submitting a question
`Prev <ar01s04.html>`__?
?
?\ `Next <ar01s06.html>`__

--------------

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="sect1">

.. raw:: html

   <div class="titlepage" xmlns="">

.. raw:: html

   <div>

.. raw:: html

   <div>

5.?Before submitting a question
-------------------------------

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

You can (and should) do some things yourself before asking a question on
one of the mailing lists:

.. raw:: html

   <div class="itemizedlist">

-  Try solving the problem on your own. If you post a question which
   shows that you have tried to solve the problem, your question will
   generally attract more positive attention from people reading it.
   Trying to solve the problem yourself will also enhance your
   understanding of FreeBSD, and will eventually let you use your
   knowledge to help others by answering questions posted to the mailing
   lists.

-  Read the manual pages, and the FreeBSD documentation (either
   installed in ``/usr/doc`` or accessible via WWW at
   ``http://www.FreeBSD.org``), especially the
   `handbook <../../../../doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/books/handbook/index.html>`__
   and the
   `FAQ <../../../../doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/books/faq/index.html>`__.

-  Browse and/or search the archives for the mailing list, to see if
   your question or a similar one has been asked (and possibly answered)
   on the list. You can browse and/or search the mailing list archives
   at ``http://www.FreeBSD.org/mail`` and
   ``http://www.FreeBSD.org/search/search.html#mailinglists``
   respectively. This can be done at other WWW sites as well, for
   example at ``http://marc.theaimsgroup.com``.

-  Use a search engine such as `Google <http://www.google.com>`__ or
   `Yahoo <http://www.yahoo.com>`__ to find answers to your question.
   Google even has a `BSD-specific search
   interface <http://www.google.com/bsd>`__.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="navfooter">

--------------

+----------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------------+
| `Prev <ar01s04.html>`__?                           | ?                       | ?\ `Next <ar01s06.html>`__     |
+----------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 4.?Should I ask ``-questions`` or ``-hackers``??   | `Home <index.html>`__   | ?6.?How to submit a question   |
+----------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------------+

.. raw:: html

   </div>

All FreeBSD documents are available for download at
http://ftp.FreeBSD.org/pub/FreeBSD/doc/

| Questions that are not answered by the
  `documentation <http://www.FreeBSD.org/docs.html>`__ may be sent to
  <freebsd-questions@FreeBSD.org\ >.
|  Send questions about this document to <freebsd-doc@FreeBSD.org\ >.
