========================================
2.?How to subscribe to FreeBSD-questions
========================================

.. raw:: html

   <div class="navheader">

2.?How to subscribe to FreeBSD-questions
`Prev <index.html>`__?
?
?\ `Next <ar01s03.html>`__

--------------

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="sect1">

.. raw:: html

   <div class="titlepage" xmlns="">

.. raw:: html

   <div>

.. raw:: html

   <div>

2.?How to subscribe to FreeBSD-questions
----------------------------------------

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

FreeBSD-questions is a mailing list, so you need mail access. Point your
WWW browser to the `information page of the FreeBSD-questions mailing
list <http://lists.FreeBSD.org/mailman/listinfo/freebsd-questions>`__.
In the section titled “Subscribing to freebsd-questions” fill in the
“Your email address” field; the other fields are optional.

.. raw:: html

   <div class="note" xmlns="">

Note:
~~~~~

The password fields in the subscription form provide only mild security,
but should prevent others from messing with your subscription. *Do not
use a valuable password* as it will occasionally be emailed back to you
in cleartext.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

You will receive a confirmation message from mailman; follow the
included instructions to complete your subscription.

Finally, when you get the “Welcome” message from mailman telling you the
details of the list and subscription area password, *please save it*. If
you ever should want to leave the list, you will need the information
there. See the next section for more details.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="navfooter">

--------------

+--------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
| `Prev <index.html>`__?                                             | ?                       | ?\ `Next <ar01s03.html>`__                      |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
| How to get best results from the FreeBSD-questions mailing list?   | `Home <index.html>`__   | ?3.?How to unsubscribe from FreeBSD-questions   |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+-------------------------------------------------+

.. raw:: html

   </div>

All FreeBSD documents are available for download at
http://ftp.FreeBSD.org/pub/FreeBSD/doc/

| Questions that are not answered by the
  `documentation <http://www.FreeBSD.org/docs.html>`__ may be sent to
  <freebsd-questions@FreeBSD.org\ >.
|  Send questions about this document to <freebsd-doc@FreeBSD.org\ >.
