====================================================
Chapter?23.?Localization - i18n/L10n Usage and Setup
====================================================

.. raw:: html

   <div class="navheader">

Chapter?23.?Localization - i18n/L10n Usage and Setup
`Prev <virtualization-host-bhyve.html>`__?
Part?III.?System Administration
?\ `Next <using-localization.html>`__

--------------

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="chapter">

.. raw:: html

   <div class="titlepage" xmlns="">

.. raw:: html

   <div>

.. raw:: html

   <div>

Chapter?23.?Localization - i18n/L10n Usage and Setup
----------------------------------------------------

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div>

Contributed by Andrey Chernov.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div>

Rewritten by Michael C. Wu.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="toc">

.. raw:: html

   <div class="toc-title">

Table of Contents

.. raw:: html

   </div>

`23.1. Synopsis <l10n.html#l10n-synopsis>`__
`23.2. Using Localization <using-localization.html>`__
`23.3. Finding i18n Applications <l10n-compiling.html>`__
`23.4. Locale Configuration for Specific Languages <lang-setup.html>`__

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="sect1">

.. raw:: html

   <div class="titlepage" xmlns="">

.. raw:: html

   <div>

.. raw:: html

   <div>

23.1.?Synopsis
--------------

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

FreeBSD is a distributed project with users and contributors located all
over the world. As such, FreeBSD supports localization into many
languages, allowing users to view, input, or process data in non-English
languages. One can choose from most of the major languages, including,
but not limited to: Chinese, German, Japanese, Korean, French, Russian,
and Vietnamese.

The term internationalization has been shortened to i18n, which
represents the number of letters between the first and the last letters
of ``internationalization``. L10n uses the same naming scheme, but from
``localization``. The i18n/L10n methods, protocols, and applications
allow users to use languages of their choice.

This chapter discusses the internationalization and localization
features of FreeBSD. After reading this chapter, you will know:

.. raw:: html

   <div class="itemizedlist">

-  How locale names are constructed.

-  How to set the locale for a login shell.

-  How to configure the console for non-English languages.

-  How to configure Xorg for different languages.

-  How to find i18n-compliant applications.

-  Where to find more information for configuring specific languages.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

Before reading this chapter, you should:

.. raw:: html

   <div class="itemizedlist">

-  Know how to `install additional third-party
   applications <ports.html>`__.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="navfooter">

--------------

+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| `Prev <virtualization-host-bhyve.html>`__?   | `Up <system-administration.html>`__   | ?\ `Next <using-localization.html>`__   |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 22.4.?FreeBSD as a Host with bhyve?          | `Home <index.html>`__                 | ?23.2.?Using Localization               |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+

.. raw:: html

   </div>

All FreeBSD documents are available for download at
http://ftp.FreeBSD.org/pub/FreeBSD/doc/

| Questions that are not answered by the
  `documentation <http://www.FreeBSD.org/docs.html>`__ may be sent to
  <freebsd-questions@FreeBSD.org\ >.
|  Send questions about this document to <freebsd-doc@FreeBSD.org\ >.
