============
Legal Notice
============

.. raw:: html

   <div class="legalnotice">

FreeBSD is a registered trademark of the FreeBSD Foundation.

3Com and HomeConnect are registered trademarks of 3Com Corporation.

3ware is a registered trademark of 3ware Inc.

ARM is a registered trademark of ARM Limited.

Adaptec is a registered trademark of Adaptec, Inc.

Adobe, Acrobat, Acrobat Reader, Flash and PostScript are either
registered trademarks or trademarks of Adobe Systems Incorporated in the
United States and/or other countries.

Apple, AirPort, FireWire, iMac, iPhone, iPad, Mac, Macintosh, Mac OS,
Quicktime, and TrueType are trademarks of Apple Inc., registered in the
U.S. and other countries.

Android is a trademark of Google Inc.

Heidelberg, Helvetica, Palatino, and Times Roman are either registered
trademarks or trademarks of Heidelberger Druckmaschinen AG in the U.S.
and other countries.

IBM, AIX, OS/2, PowerPC, PS/2, S/390, and ThinkPad are trademarks of
International Business Machines Corporation in the United States, other
countries, or both.

IEEE, POSIX, and 802 are registered trademarks of Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. in the United States.

Intel, Celeron, Centrino, Core, EtherExpress, i386, i486, Itanium,
Pentium, and Xeon are trademarks or registered trademarks of Intel
Corporation or its subsidiaries in the United States and other
countries.

Intuit and Quicken are registered trademarks and/or registered service
marks of Intuit Inc., or one of its subsidiaries, in the United States
and other countries.

Linux is a registered trademark of Linus Torvalds.

LSI Logic, AcceleRAID, eXtremeRAID, MegaRAID and Mylex are trademarks or
registered trademarks of LSI Logic Corp.

Microsoft, IntelliMouse, MS-DOS, Outlook, Windows, Windows Media and
Windows NT are either registered trademarks or trademarks of Microsoft
Corporation in the United States and/or other countries.

Motif, OSF/1, and UNIX are registered trademarks and IT DialTone and The
Open Group are trademarks of The Open Group in the United States and
other countries.

Oracle is a registered trademark of Oracle Corporation.

RealNetworks, RealPlayer, and RealAudio are the registered trademarks of
RealNetworks, Inc.

Red Hat, RPM, are trademarks or registered trademarks of Red Hat, Inc.
in the United States and other countries.

Sun, Sun Microsystems, Java, Java Virtual Machine, JDK, JRE, JSP, JVM,
Netra, OpenJDK, Solaris, StarOffice, SunOS and VirtualBox are trademarks
or registered trademarks of Sun Microsystems, Inc. in the United States
and other countries.

MATLAB is a registered trademark of The MathWorks, Inc.

SpeedTouch is a trademark of Thomson.

VMware is a trademark of VMware, Inc.

Mathematica is a registered trademark of Wolfram Research, Inc.

XFree86 is a trademark of The XFree86 Project, Inc.

Ogg Vorbis and Xiph.Org are trademarks of Xiph.Org.

Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to
distinguish their products are claimed as trademarks. Where those
designations appear in this document, and the FreeBSD Project was aware
of the trademark claim, the designations have been followed by the “™”
or the “?” symbol.

.. raw:: html

   </div>
