====================================
BSDCon 2003 FreeBSD Developer Summit
====================================

.. raw:: html

   <div id="containerwrap">

.. raw:: html

   <div id="container">

.. raw:: html

   <div id="content">

.. raw:: html

   <div id="sidewrap">

.. raw:: html

   <div id="sidenav">

Section Navigation
------------------

-  `About <../../about.html>`__
-  `Features <../../features.html>`__
-  `Applications <../../applications.html>`__
-  `Advocacy <../../advocacy/>`__
-  `Marketing <../../marketing/>`__
-  `Administration <../../administration.html>`__
-  `News <../../news/newsflash.html>`__
-  `Events <../../events/events.html>`__
-  `Press <../../news/press.html>`__
-  `Multimedia <../../multimedia/multimedia.html>`__
-  `Artwork <../../art.html>`__
-  `Logo <../../logo.html>`__
-  `Donations <../../donations/>`__
-  `Legal Notices <../../copyright/>`__
-  `Privacy Policy <../../privacy.html>`__

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div id="contentwrap">

BSDCon 2003 FreeBSD Developer Summit
====================================

The fifth FreeBSD Developer Summit was held on September 13, 2003, at
Vicor's offices in Richmond, CA, immediately following BSDCon 2003 in
San Mateo, CA. The FreeBSD Developer Summit was sponsored by DARPA, NAI
Labs, and Vicor. Notes were taken by Bruce Mah and were edited by Murray
Stokely.

Meeting began at 10:00am, ended at 5:00pm.

Agenda
------

-  `Introduction / Summary of FreeBSD BoF / Growth of
   Project <#intro>`__
-  `Release Engineering, RELENG\_4 <#re4>`__
-  `Release Engineering, HEAD <#re5>`__

Attending:
----------

In person:

-  Doug Barton
-  David O'Brien
-  Matthew Dillon
-  Julian Elischer
-  Poul-Henning Kamp
-  Greg Lehey
-  Scott Long
-  Warner Losh
-  Bruce Mah
-  Jun Kuriyama
-  Jonathon Mini
-  Masafumi Nakane
-  Jeff Roberson
-  Hiroki Sato
-  Gregory Shapiro
-  Murray Stokely
-  Jacques Vidrine
-  Robert Watson

On The Phone:

The meeting followed a format where each section was led by an
individual and then a discussion ensued.

.. raw:: html

   <div class="topic">

--------------

Opening Remarks - Robert Watson
-------------------------------

Welcome to the fifth FreeBSD Developer Summit at BSDCon 2003. This event
is sponsored by:

-  Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)
-  NAI Labs, the Security Research Division of Network Associates
-  Vicor

The sponsors covered the cost of the room, food, telephone access, etc.

Growth of the Project (from BoF)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Positive Netcraft numbers

HEAD activity maintained even when ``RELENG_3`` came out.

As soon as ``RELENG_4`` came out, ``RELENG_3`` activity dropped
dramatically.

Large spike in commits just before ``RELENG_5_0_0_RELEASE``.

About half the number of committers are working on RELENG\_4 compared to
the HEAD. Implies that most commits to RELENG\_4 really do go through
HEAD first.

Slightly less than half of commits go into ``sys/``

Perforce submission rates are about half that of rate in the main
``src/`` CVS branch.

"RaidFrame fell victim to a disk error." --scottl

*(Tentative schedule reviewed)*

.. raw:: html

   <div class="topic">

--------------

Release Engineering, RELENG\_4 - Murray Stokely
-----------------------------------------------

Complaints about PAE stability. Definitely need to tweak 4.9 schedule.
Need to get people access to hardware to check stability under high
load. Really need stability for non-PAE case.

Seems like a 2-week delay. sam is holding changes for MFC, waiting for
things to settle down. dg wants the PAE stuff ripped out. phk thinks
we're going to delay more like 6 weeks before we have confidence in
this.

Discussion
~~~~~~~~~~

.. raw:: html

   <div class="discussion">

**PHK** : Could we put this in P4?

**IMP** : Problem is that non-PAE users (who are having problems) won't
have motivation to use it if it's not in CVS.

**rwatson** : What's minimalist backout patch? We need to get more info.
Are PAE developers going to have time to work on this? If not, we have
to kick it out.

Two-week timeline to get more information for fixing it. Need to be able
to reproduce it in a developer environment...need information on
workload.

**peter** : Things that he and ps would run into this problem pretty
quickly. (Want to get silby in touch with him.)

"I'll just tell Paul that the next snapshot he makes has an unknown bug
causing instability and he'll just go crazy trying to fix it." --peter.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="topic">

--------------

Release Engineering, HEAD - Scott Long
--------------------------------------

"Somebody get him some tissues so he can cry without shorting out his
laptop." --peter.

**scottl** : amd64 ia64 sparc64 support.

Discussion
~~~~~~~~~~

.. raw:: html

   <div class="discussion">

**marcel** : New uart(4) driver supports serial console on the HP boxes
in the cluster. HP boxes with no ISA bus emulation now supported from
CVS. Should now be able to release for all ia64 boxes from CVS.

**imp** : uart(4) driver encapsulates lots of different UART chips.
puc(4) driver is for aggregating many things at one attachment point.

Could we replace sio(4) with uart(4)? sio(4) is more about squeezing out
performance, uart(4) is more about flexibility. Low-end performance
would suck, but that's probably not the target platform for 6.0.

phk wants minimum hardware specs for releases. grog says that the people
in this room are not typical users. Much debate about this. rwatson:
Defer this for 6.0 session.

5.X efforts need to concentrate on stability and performance.

**imp** : Need to tie up loose ends in supported hardware, etc.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div id="footer">

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>
