============================
4.?Configuring the si driver
============================

.. raw:: html

   <div class="navheader">

4.?Configuring the ``si`` driver
`Prev <cy.html>`__?
?
?

--------------

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="sect1">

.. raw:: html

   <div class="titlepage" xmlns="">

.. raw:: html

   <div>

.. raw:: html

   <div>

4.?Configuring the ``si`` driver
--------------------------------

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

*Contributed by Nick Sayer ``<nsayer@FreeBSD.org>``. 25 March 1998.*

The Specialix SI/XIO and SX multiport cards use the ``si`` driver. A
single machine can have up to 4 host cards. The following host cards are
supported:

.. raw:: html

   <div class="itemizedlist">

-  ISA SI/XIO host card (2 versions)

-  EISA SI/XIO host card

-  PCI SI/XIO host card

-  ISA SX host card

-  PCI SX host card

.. raw:: html

   </div>

Although the SX and SI/XIO host cards look markedly different, their
functionality are basically the same. The host cards do not use I/O
locations, but instead require a 32K chunk of memory. The factory
configuration for ISA cards places this at ``0xd0000-0xd7fff``. They
also require an IRQ. PCI cards will, of course, auto-configure
themselves.

You can attach up to 4 external modules to each host card. The external
modules contain either 4 or 8 serial ports. They come in the following
varieties:

.. raw:: html

   <div class="itemizedlist">

-  SI 4 or 8 port modules. Up to 57600 bps on each port supported.

-  XIO 8 port modules. Up to 115200 bps on each port supported. One type
   of XIO module has 7 serial and 1 parallel port.

-  SXDC 8 port modules. Up to 921600 bps on each port supported. Like
   XIO, a module is available with one parallel port as well.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

To configure an ISA host card, add the following line to your kernel
configuration file, changing the numbers as appropriate:

.. code:: programlisting

    device si0 at isa? iomem 0xd0000 irq 11

Valid IRQ numbers are 9, 10, 11, 12 and 15 for SX ISA host cards and 11,
12 and 15 for SI/XIO ISA host cards.

To configure an EISA or PCI host card, use this line:

.. code:: programlisting

    device si0

After adding the configuration entry, rebuild and install your new
kernel.

.. raw:: html

   <div class="note" xmlns="">

Note:
~~~~~

The following step, is not necessary if you are using
`devfs(5) <http://www.FreeBSD.org/cgi/man.cgi?query=devfs&sektion=5>`__
in FreeBSD?5.\ *``X``*.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

After rebooting with the new kernel, you need to make the device nodes
in ``/dev``. The ``MAKEDEV`` script will take care of this for you.
Count how many total ports you have and type:

.. code:: screen

    # cd /dev
    # ./MAKEDEV ttyAnn cuaAnn

(where *``nn``* is the number of ports)

If you want login prompts to appear on these ports, you will need to add
lines like this to ``/etc/ttys``:

.. code:: programlisting

    ttyA01  "/usr/libexec/getty std.9600"   vt100   on insecure

Change the terminal type as appropriate. For modems, **``dialup``** or
**``unknown``** is fine.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="navfooter">

--------------

+-------------------------------------+-------------------------+-----+
| `Prev <cy.html>`__?                 | ?                       | ?   |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------+-----+
| 3.?Configuring the ``cy`` driver?   | `Home <index.html>`__   | ?   |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------+-----+

.. raw:: html

   </div>

All FreeBSD documents are available for download at
http://ftp.FreeBSD.org/pub/FreeBSD/doc/

| Questions that are not answered by the
  `documentation <http://www.FreeBSD.org/docs.html>`__ may be sent to
  <freebsd-questions@FreeBSD.org\ >.
|  Send questions about this document to <freebsd-doc@FreeBSD.org\ >.
