=====
Index
=====

.. raw:: html

   <div class="navheader">

Index
`Prev <freebsd-glossary.html>`__?
?
?\ `Next <colophon.html>`__

--------------

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="index">

.. raw:: html

   <div class="titlepage" xmlns="">

.. raw:: html

   <div>

.. raw:: html

   <div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="index">

.. raw:: html

   <div class="indexdiv">

Symbols
~~~~~~~

-CURRENT, `Tracking a Development Branch <current-stable.html>`__
compiling, `Using FreeBSD-CURRENT <current-stable.html#current>`__
using, `Using FreeBSD-CURRENT <current-stable.html#current>`__
-STABLE, `Tracking a Development Branch <current-stable.html>`__
compiling, `Using FreeBSD-STABLE <current-stable.html#stable>`__
using, `Using FreeBSD-STABLE <current-stable.html#stable>`__
.k5login, `Configuring a Client to Use
Kerberos <kerberos5.html#idp75987536>`__
.k5users, `Configuring a Client to Use
Kerberos <kerberos5.html#idp75987536>`__
.rhosts, `File System Backups <backup-basics.html#idp78687952>`__
/boot/kernel.old, `Building and Installing a Custom
Kernel <kernelconfig-building.html>`__
/etc, `Designing the Partition
Layout <bsdinstall-partitioning.html#configtuning-initial>`__
/etc/groups, `Managing Groups <users-synopsis.html#users-groups>`__
/etc/login.conf, `Configuring Login
Classes <security-resourcelimits.html#users-limiting>`__
/etc/mail/access, `Sendmail Configuration Files <sendmail.html>`__
/etc/mail/aliases, `Sendmail Configuration Files <sendmail.html>`__
/etc/mail/local-host-names, `Sendmail Configuration
Files <sendmail.html>`__
/etc/mail/mailer.conf, `Sendmail Configuration Files <sendmail.html>`__
/etc/mail/mailertable, `Sendmail Configuration Files <sendmail.html>`__
/etc/mail/sendmail.cf, `Sendmail Configuration Files <sendmail.html>`__
/etc/mail/virtusertable, `Sendmail Configuration
Files <sendmail.html>`__
/etc/remote, `Using AT Commands <dialout.html#direct-at>`__
/etc/ttys, `Modem Configuration <dialup.html#dialup-ttys>`__
/usr, `Designing the Partition
Layout <bsdinstall-partitioning.html#configtuning-initial>`__
/usr/bin/login, `Modem Configuration <dialup.html#dialup-ttys>`__
/usr/share/skel, `adduser <users-synopsis.html#users-adduser>`__
/var, `Designing the Partition
Layout <bsdinstall-partitioning.html#configtuning-initial>`__
386BSD, `A Brief History of FreeBSD <history.html#intro-history>`__
386BSD Patchkit, `A Brief History of
FreeBSD <history.html#intro-history>`__
4.3BSD-Lite, `A Brief History of FreeBSD <history.html#intro-history>`__
4.4BSD-Lite, `Welcome to FreeBSD! <nutshell.html>`__, `What Can FreeBSD
Do? <nutshell.html#os-overview>`__
802.11 (see wireless networking)

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="indexdiv">

A
~

AbiWord, `AbiWord <desktop-productivity.html#idp72135504>`__
accounting
disk space, `Disk Quotas <quotas.html>`__
accounts
adding, `adduser <users-synopsis.html#users-adduser>`__
changing password, `passwd <users-synopsis.html#users-passwd>`__
daemon, `System Accounts <users-synopsis.html#users-system>`__
groups, `Managing Groups <users-synopsis.html#users-groups>`__
limiting, `Configuring Login
Classes <security-resourcelimits.html#users-limiting>`__
modifying, `Managing Accounts <users-synopsis.html#users-modifying>`__
nobody, `System Accounts <users-synopsis.html#users-system>`__
operator, `System Accounts <users-synopsis.html#users-system>`__
removing, `rmuser <users-synopsis.html#users-rmuser>`__
superuser (root), `The Superuser
Account <users-synopsis.html#users-superuser>`__
system, `System Accounts <users-synopsis.html#users-system>`__
user, `User Accounts <users-synopsis.html#users-user>`__
ACL, `Access Control Lists <fs-acl.html>`__
ACPI, `Power and Resource Management <acpi-overview.html>`__, `Common
Problems <acpi-overview.html#ACPI-comprob>`__
ASL, `BIOS Contains Buggy
Bytecode <acpi-overview.html#ACPI-aslanddump>`__, `Overriding the
Default AML <acpi-overview.html#idp75132496>`__
debugging, `Getting and Submitting Debugging
Info <acpi-overview.html#ACPI-submitdebug>`__
problems, `Common Problems <acpi-overview.html#ACPI-comprob>`__,
`Getting and Submitting Debugging
Info <acpi-overview.html#ACPI-submitdebug>`__
address redirection, `Address
Redirection <firewalls-ipfw.html#idp87099984>`__
adduser, `adduser <users-synopsis.html#users-adduser>`__, `Utilities
Which Change Login Classes <using-localization.html#idp81850704>`__
AIX, `Network Information System (NIS) <network-nis.html>`__
amd, `Automating Mounts with amd(8) <network-nfs.html#network-amd>`__
anti-aliased fonts, `Anti-Aliased Fonts <x-fonts.html#antialias>`__
Apache, `Who Uses
FreeBSD? <nutshell.html#introduction-nutshell-users>`__, `Apache HTTP
Server <network-apache.html>`__
configuration file, `Configuring and Starting
Apache <network-apache.html#idp85981136>`__
modules, `Apache Modules <network-apache.html#idp86040528>`__
starting or stopping, `Configuring and Starting
Apache <network-apache.html#idp85981136>`__
Apache OpenOffice , `Apache
OpenOffice <desktop-productivity.html#idp72155600>`__
APIC
disabling, `System Hangs <acpi-overview.html#idp75101648>`__
APM, `Power and Resource Management <acpi-overview.html>`__
Apple, `Who Uses FreeBSD? <nutshell.html#introduction-nutshell-users>`__
ASCII, `Using Localization <using-localization.html>`__
AT&T, `A Brief History of FreeBSD <history.html#intro-history>`__
AUDIT, `Synopsis <audit.html#audit-synopsis>`__
autofs, `Automating Mounts with
autofs(5) <network-nfs.html#network-autofs>`__
automatic mounter daemon, `Automating Mounts with
amd(8) <network-nfs.html#network-amd>`__
automounter subsystem, `Automating Mounts with
autofs(5) <network-nfs.html#network-autofs>`__
AutoPPP, `Configuring Dial-in Services <userppp.html#userppp-mgetty>`__

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="indexdiv">

B
~

backup software, `Third-Party Backup
Utilities <backup-basics.html#backups-programs-amanda>`__
cpio, `Directory Backups <backup-basics.html#idp78719952>`__
dump / restore, `File System Backups <backup-basics.html#idp78687952>`__
pax, `Directory Backups <backup-basics.html#idp78719952>`__
tar, `Directory Backups <backup-basics.html#idp78719952>`__
Basic Input/Output System (see BIOS)
BGP, `Configuring a Router with Static
Routes <network-routing.html#network-static-routes>`__
binary compatibility
BSD/OS, `What Can FreeBSD Do? <nutshell.html#os-overview>`__
Linux, `What Can FreeBSD Do? <nutshell.html#os-overview>`__,
`Synopsis <linuxemu.html#linuxemu-synopsis>`__
NetBSD, `What Can FreeBSD Do? <nutshell.html#os-overview>`__
SCO, `What Can FreeBSD Do? <nutshell.html#os-overview>`__
SVR4, `What Can FreeBSD Do? <nutshell.html#os-overview>`__
BIND, `Troubleshooting <mail-trouble.html>`__, `Domain Name System
(DNS) <network-dns.html>`__
caching name server, `Caching Name
Server <network-dns.html#idp85834320>`__
configuration files, `Configuration
Files <network-dns.html#idp85710416>`__
DNS security extensions, `DNSSEC <network-dns.html#idp85836624>`__
starting, `Starting BIND <network-dns.html#idp85688400>`__
zone files, `Zone Files <network-dns.html#idp85764432>`__
BIOS, `BIOS Drive
Numbering <install-steps.html#install-drive-bios-numbering>`__, `FreeBSD
Boot Process <boot-introduction.html>`__
bits-per-second, `Serial Terminology and Hardware <serial.html>`__
Bluetooth, `Bluetooth <network-bluetooth.html>`__
Boot Loader, `FreeBSD Boot Process <boot-introduction.html>`__
Boot Manager, `FreeBSD Boot Process <boot-introduction.html>`__, `The
Boot Manager <boot-introduction.html#boot-boot0>`__
boot-loader, `Stage Three <boot-introduction.html#boot-loader>`__
booting, `Synopsis <boot.html#boot-synopsis>`__
bootstrap, `Synopsis <boot.html#boot-synopsis>`__
Bourne shells, `Shells <shells.html>`__
bridge, `Bridging <network-bridging.html>`__
browsers
web, `Browsers <desktop-browsers.html>`__
BSD Copyright, `FreeBSD?Project Goals <history.html#goals>`__
BSD Router, `Who Uses
FreeBSD? <nutshell.html#introduction-nutshell-users>`__
bsdlabel, `Emergency Recovery <backup-basics.html#idp78793680>`__

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="indexdiv">

C
~

Calligra, `Calligra <desktop-productivity.html#idp72121936>`__
CARP, `Common Address Redundancy Protocol (CARP) <carp.html>`__
CD burner
ATAPI, `Creating and Using CD Media <creating-cds.html>`__
ATAPI/CAM driver, `Supported Devices <creating-cds.html#atapicam>`__
CD-ROMs
burning, `Burning a CD <creating-cds.html#cdrecord>`__
creating, `Creating and Using CD Media <creating-cds.html>`__
creating bootable, `Writing Data to an ISO File
System <creating-cds.html#mkisofs>`__
CHAP, `PAP and CHAP Authentication <userppp.html#userppp-PAPnCHAP>`__
chpass, `chpass <users-synopsis.html#users-chpass>`__
Chromium, `Chromium <desktop-browsers.html#idp72069200>`__
Cisco, `Who Uses FreeBSD? <nutshell.html#introduction-nutshell-users>`__
Citrix, `Who Uses
FreeBSD? <nutshell.html#introduction-nutshell-users>`__
color
contrast, `Troubleshooting Questions and
Answers <install-trouble.html#idp69508816>`__
command line, `Shells <shells.html>`__
committers, `The FreeBSD Development Model <history.html#development>`__
Common Address Redundancy Protocol, `Common Address Redundancy Protocol
(CARP) <carp.html>`__
Compiler, `What Can FreeBSD Do? <nutshell.html#os-overview>`__
compilers
C, `What Can FreeBSD Do? <nutshell.html#os-overview>`__
C++, `What Can FreeBSD Do? <nutshell.html#os-overview>`__
Computer Systems Research Group (CSRG), `What Can FreeBSD
Do? <nutshell.html#os-overview>`__
Concurrent Versions System (see CVS)
console, `Virtual Consoles and Terminals <consoles.html>`__,
`Single-User Mode <boot-introduction.html#boot-singleuser>`__
contributors, `The FreeBSD Development
Model <history.html#development>`__
core team, `The FreeBSD Development Model <history.html#development>`__
country codes, `Using Localization <using-localization.html>`__
cron
configuration, `Configuring cron(8) <configtuning-cron.html>`__
cryptography, `mod\_ssl <network-apache.html#idp86053072>`__
CTM, `Synchronizing Source <synching.html>`__, `Using CTM <ctm.html>`__
cu1, `Installing FreeBSD on a System Without a Monitor or
Keyboard <install-advanced.html#headless-install>`__
cuau, `Serial Port Configuration <serial.html#serial-hw-config>`__
CVS, `The FreeBSD Development Model <history.html#development>`__
CVS Repository, `The FreeBSD Development
Model <history.html#development>`__

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="indexdiv">

D
~

dangerously dedicated, `Disk Organization <disk-organization.html>`__
DCE, `Serial Terminology and Hardware <serial.html>`__
Deleting obsolete files and directories, `Deleting Obsolete Files and
Libraries <makeworld.html#make-delete-old>`__
Dell KACE, `Who Uses
FreeBSD? <nutshell.html#introduction-nutshell-users>`__
device nodes, `Troubleshooting
Sound <sound-setup.html#troubleshooting>`__
device.hints, `Device Hints <device-hints.html>`__
DGA, `Determining Video
Capabilities <video-playback.html#video-interface>`__
DHCP
configuration files, `Configuring a DHCP
Client <network-dhcp.html#idp85453264>`__, `Installing and Configuring a
DHCP Server <network-dhcp.html#network-dhcp-server>`__
dhcpd.conf, `Installing and Configuring a DHCP
Server <network-dhcp.html#network-dhcp-server>`__
diskless operation, `Configuring the DHCP
Server <network-diskless.html#network-pxe-setting-up-dhcp>`__
installation, `Installing and Configuring a DHCP
Server <network-dhcp.html#network-dhcp-server>`__
server, `Installing and Configuring a DHCP
Server <network-dhcp.html#network-dhcp-server>`__
dial-in service, `Dial-in Service <dialup.html>`__
dial-out service, `Dial-out Service <dialout.html>`__
directories, `Permissions <permissions.html>`__
directory hierarchy, `Directory Structure <dirstructure.html>`__
Disk Labels, `Labeling Disk Devices <geom-glabel.html>`__
Disk Mirroring, `RAID1 - Mirroring <geom-mirror.html>`__
disk quotas, `Resource Limits <security-resourcelimits.html>`__, `Disk
Quotas <quotas.html>`__
checking, `Enabling Disk Quotas <quotas.html#idp78928208>`__, `Checking
Quota Limits and Disk Usage <quotas.html#idp78970704>`__
limits, `Setting Quota Limits <quotas.html#idp78949968>`__
diskless operation, `Diskless Operation with
PXE <network-diskless.html>`__
diskless workstation, `Diskless Operation with
PXE <network-diskless.html>`__
disks
adding, `Adding Disks <disks-adding.html>`__
detaching a memory disk, `Attaching and Detaching Existing
Images <disks-virtual.html#disks-mdconfig>`__
encrypting, `Encrypting Disk Partitions <disks-encrypting.html>`__
memory, `Attaching and Detaching Existing
Images <disks-virtual.html#disks-mdconfig>`__
memory file system, `Creating a File- or Memory-Backed Memory
Disk <disks-virtual.html#disks-md-freebsd5>`__
resizing, `Resizing and Growing Disks <disks-growing.html>`__
Django, `Django <network-apache.html#idp86095184>`__
DNS, `Hostnames <configtuning-configfiles.html#idp74653648>`__,
`Advanced Configuration <userppp.html#idp83682000>`__, `Mail
Components <mail-using.html>`__, `Mail for a
Domain <mail-advanced.html#mail-domain>`__, `Domain Name System
(DNS) <network-dns.html>`__
records, `Zone Files <network-dns.html#idp85764432>`__
DNS Server, `What Can FreeBSD Do? <nutshell.html#os-overview>`__
Documentation (see Updating and Upgrading)
documentation package (see Updating and Upgrading)
DOS, `Prepare the Boot Media <install-pre.html#install-boot-media>`__
DSP, `Troubleshooting Sound <sound-setup.html#troubleshooting>`__
DTE, `Serial Terminology and Hardware <serial.html>`__
DTrace, `Synopsis <dtrace.html#dtrace-synopsis>`__
DTrace support (see DTrace)
dual homed hosts, `Configuring a Router with Static
Routes <network-routing.html#network-static-routes>`__
dump, `File System Backups <backup-basics.html#idp78687952>`__
DVD
burning, `Creating and Using DVD Media <creating-dvds.html>`__
DVD+RW, `Using a DVD+RW <creating-dvds.html#idp78573008>`__
DVD-RAM, `Using a DVD-RAM <creating-dvds.html#creating-dvd-ram>`__
DVD-RW, `Using a DVD-RW <creating-dvds.html#idp78596816>`__
DVD-Video, `Burning a DVD-Video <creating-dvds.html#idp78555088>`__
Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (see DHCP)

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="indexdiv">

E
~

editors, `Text Editors <editors.html>`__
ee1, `Text Editors <editors.html>`__
ee, `Text Editors <editors.html>`__
electronic mail (see email)
ELF, `Advanced Topics <linuxemu-advanced.html>`__
branding, `Advanced Topics <linuxemu-advanced.html>`__
emacs, `Text Editors <editors.html>`__
email, `What Can FreeBSD Do? <nutshell.html#os-overview>`__,
`Synopsis <mail.html#mail-synopsis>`__
change mta, `Changing the Mail Transfer Agent <mail-changingmta.html>`__
configuration, `Basic Configuration <mail-advanced.html#mail-config>`__
receiving, `Mail Components <mail-using.html>`__
troubleshooting, `Troubleshooting <mail-trouble.html>`__
embedded, `What Can FreeBSD Do? <nutshell.html#os-overview>`__
encodings, `Using Localization <using-localization.html>`__
environment variables, `Shells <shells.html>`__
ePDFView, `ePDFView <desktop-viewers.html#idp72269008>`__
execution class loader, `Advanced Topics <linuxemu-advanced.html>`__
Experts Exchange, `Who Uses
FreeBSD? <nutshell.html#introduction-nutshell-users>`__

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="indexdiv">

F
~

failover, `Link Aggregation and Failover <network-aggregation.html>`__
FEC, `Link Aggregation and Failover <network-aggregation.html>`__
fetchmail, `Using fetchmail <mail-fetchmail.html>`__
file permissions, `Permissions <permissions.html>`__
file server
UNIX clients, `Network File System (NFS) <network-nfs.html>`__
Windows clients, `File and Print Services for Microsoft??Windows?
Clients (Samba) <network-samba.html>`__
file systems
ISO 9660, `Creating and Using CD Media <creating-cds.html>`__, `Writing
Data to an ISO File System <creating-cds.html#mkisofs>`__
Joliet, `Writing Data to an ISO File
System <creating-cds.html#mkisofs>`__
mounted with fstab, `The fstab File <mount-unmount.html#disks-fstab>`__
mounting, `Using mount(8) <mount-unmount.html#disks-mount>`__
snapshots, `File System Snapshots <snapshots.html>`__
unmounting, `Using umount(8) <mount-unmount.html#disks-umount>`__
File Systems, `Synopsis <filesystems.html#filesystems-synopsis>`__
File Systems Support (see File Systems)
Firefox, `Firefox <desktop-browsers.html#idp71966672>`__
firewall, `What Can FreeBSD Do? <nutshell.html#os-overview>`__,
`Firewalls <firewalls.html>`__
IPFILTER, `IPFILTER (IPF) <firewalls-ipf.html>`__
IPFW, `IPFW <firewalls-ipfw.html>`__
PF, `PF <firewalls-pf.html>`__
rulesets, `Firewall Concepts <firewalls-concepts.html>`__
Flash, `Firefox and Adobe? Flash?
Plugin <desktop-browsers.html#moz-flash-plugin>`__
fonts
anti-aliased, `Anti-Aliased Fonts <x-fonts.html#antialias>`__
spacing, `Anti-Aliased Fonts <x-fonts.html#antialias>`__
TrueType, `TrueType? Fonts <x-fonts.html#truetype>`__
Fonts
LCD screen, `Anti-Aliased Fonts <x-fonts.html#antialias>`__
Free Software Foundation, `A Brief History of
FreeBSD <history.html#intro-history>`__, `GNU Info
Files <basics-more-information.html#basics-info>`__
FreeBSD Project
development model, `The FreeBSD Development
Model <history.html#development>`__
goals, `FreeBSD?Project Goals <history.html#goals>`__
history, `A Brief History of FreeBSD <history.html#intro-history>`__
FreeBSD Security Advisories, `FreeBSD Security
Advisories <security-advisories.html>`__
freebsd-update (see updating-upgrading)
FreeNAS, `Who Uses
FreeBSD? <nutshell.html#introduction-nutshell-users>`__
FreshPorts, `Finding Software <ports-finding-applications.html>`__
FTP
anonymous, `Anonymous FTP <install-post.html#ftpanon>`__, `Configure
Additional Network Services <install-post.html#network-services>`__,
`Configuration <network-ftp.html#idp86127440>`__
passive mode, `Choosing the Installation Media <install-media.html>`__
via a HTTP proxy, `Choosing the Installation
Media <install-media.html>`__
FTP servers, `What Can FreeBSD Do? <nutshell.html#os-overview>`__, `File
Transfer Protocol (FTP) <network-ftp.html>`__

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="indexdiv">

G
~

gateway, `Gateways and Routes <network-routing.html>`__
GEOM, `Synopsis <geom.html#geom-synopsis>`__, `RAID0 -
Striping <geom-striping.html>`__, `RAID1 -
Mirroring <geom-mirror.html>`__, `RAID3 - Byte-level Striping with
Dedicated Parity <geom-raid3.html>`__, `Software RAID
Devices <geom-graid.html>`__, `Labeling Disk
Devices <geom-glabel.html>`__, `UFS Journaling Through
GEOM <geom-gjournal.html>`__
GEOM Disk Framework (see GEOM)
getty, `Modem Configuration <dialup.html#dialup-ttys>`__
GhostBSD, `Who Uses
FreeBSD? <nutshell.html#introduction-nutshell-users>`__
GNOME, `What Can FreeBSD Do? <nutshell.html#os-overview>`__,
`GNOME <x11-wm.html#x11-wm-gnome>`__
GNU General Public License (GPL), `FreeBSD?Project
Goals <history.html#goals>`__
GNU Lesser General Public License (LGPL), `FreeBSD?Project
Goals <history.html#goals>`__
GNU toolchain, `Installing Linux? ELF
Binaries <linuxemu-lbc-install.html#idp73851984>`__
GnuCash, `GnuCash <desktop-finance.html#idp72309328>`__
Gnumeric, `Gnumeric <desktop-finance.html#idp72317648>`__
gpart, `Adding Disks <disks-adding.html>`__, `Resizing and Growing
Disks <disks-growing.html>`__
GQview, `GQview <desktop-viewers.html#idp72258384>`__
grace period, `Checking Quota Limits and Disk
Usage <quotas.html#idp78970704>`__
Greenman, David, `A Brief History of
FreeBSD <history.html#intro-history>`__
Grimes, Rod, `A Brief History of FreeBSD <history.html#intro-history>`__
groups, `Managing Groups <users-synopsis.html#users-groups>`__
gv, `gv <desktop-viewers.html#idp72244048>`__

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="indexdiv">

H
~

hard limit, `Setting Quota Limits <quotas.html#idp78949968>`__
HAST
high availability, `Highly Available Storage (HAST) <disks-hast.html>`__
HCI, `Finding Other Bluetooth
Devices <network-bluetooth.html#idp88392144>`__
horizontal scan rate (see horizontal sync frequency)
horizontal sync frequency, `Xorg Configuration <x-config.html>`__
hostname, `Hostnames <configtuning-configfiles.html#idp74653648>`__
hosts, `/etc/hosts <configtuning-configfiles.html#idp74675408>`__
HP-UX, `Network Information System (NIS) <network-nis.html>`__
Hubbard, Jordan, `A Brief History of
FreeBSD <history.html#intro-history>`__
hw.ata.wc, `hw.ata.wc <configtuning-disk.html#idp74757968>`__

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="indexdiv">

I
~

I/O port, `Troubleshooting Sound <sound-setup.html#troubleshooting>`__
IEEE, `Directory Backups <backup-basics.html#idp78719952>`__
image scanners, `Image Scanners <scanners.html>`__
IMAP, `Mail Components <mail-using.html>`__
init8, `FreeBSD Boot Process <boot-introduction.html>`__, `Last
Stage <boot-introduction.html#boot-init>`__
installation, `Synopsis <bsdinstall.html#bsdinstall-synopsis>`__,
`Synopsis <install.html#install-synopsis>`__
from Windows, `Installing from an Windows?
Partition <install-diff-media.html#install-msdos>`__
headless (serial console), `Installing FreeBSD on a System Without a
Monitor or Keyboard <install-advanced.html#headless-install>`__
network
Ethernet, `Before Installing over a
Network <install-diff-media.html#idp69721808>`__
FTP, `Choosing the Installation Media <install-media.html>`__, `Creating
a Local FTP Site with a FreeBSD
Disc <install-diff-media.html#install-ftp>`__
NFS, `Before Installing via NFS <install-diff-media.html#idp69733584>`__
parallel (PLIP), `Before Installing over a
Network <install-diff-media.html#idp69721808>`__
serial (PPP), `Before Installing over a
Network <install-diff-media.html#idp69721808>`__
troubleshooting, `Troubleshooting <bsdinstall-install-trouble.html>`__,
`Troubleshooting <install-trouble.html>`__
Intel i810 graphic chipset, `Configuration with Intel? i810 Graphics
Chipsets <x11-understanding.html#idp71876048>`__
internationalization (see localization)
Internet Systems Consortium (ISC), `Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol
(DHCP) <network-dhcp.html>`__
interrupt storms, `System Hangs <acpi-overview.html#idp75101648>`__
IP aliases, `Virtual Hosts <configtuning-virtual-hosts.html>`__
IP masquerading (see NAT)
IP subnet, `Bridging <network-bridging.html>`__
IPFILTER
enabling, `Enabling IPF <firewalls-ipf.html#idp87255632>`__
kernel options, `Enabling IPF <firewalls-ipf.html#idp87255632>`__
logging, `IPF Logging <firewalls-ipf.html#idp87512656>`__
rule syntax, `IPF Rule Syntax <firewalls-ipf.html#idp87292496>`__
statistics, `Viewing IPF Statistics <firewalls-ipf.html#idp87479376>`__
ipfstat, `Viewing IPF Statistics <firewalls-ipf.html#idp87479376>`__
IPFW
enabling, `Enabling IPFW <firewalls-ipfw.html#firewalls-ipfw-enable>`__
kernel options, `Enabling
IPFW <firewalls-ipfw.html#firewalls-ipfw-enable>`__
logging, `Logging Firewall Messages <firewalls-ipfw.html#idp87173712>`__
rule processing order, `IPFW Rule
Syntax <firewalls-ipfw.html#firewalls-ipfw-rules>`__
rule syntax, `IPFW Rule
Syntax <firewalls-ipfw.html#firewalls-ipfw-rules>`__
ipfw, `The IPFW Command <firewalls-ipfw.html#firewalls-ipfw-cmd>`__
ipmon, `IPF Logging <firewalls-ipf.html#idp87512656>`__
ipnat, `Configuring NAT <firewalls-ipf.html#idp87405392>`__
IPsec, `VPN over IPsec <ipsec.html>`__
AH, `VPN over IPsec <ipsec.html>`__
ESP, `VPN over IPsec <ipsec.html>`__
IRQ, `Troubleshooting Sound <sound-setup.html#troubleshooting>`__
Isilon, `Who Uses
FreeBSD? <nutshell.html#introduction-nutshell-users>`__
ISO 9660, `Creating and Using CD Media <creating-cds.html>`__
iXsystems, `Who Uses
FreeBSD? <nutshell.html#introduction-nutshell-users>`__

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="indexdiv">

J
~

jails, `Jails <jails.html>`__
Jolitz, Bill, `A Brief History of
FreeBSD <history.html#intro-history>`__
Journaling, `UFS Journaling Through GEOM <geom-gjournal.html>`__
Juniper, `Who Uses
FreeBSD? <nutshell.html#introduction-nutshell-users>`__

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="indexdiv">

K
~

KDE, `What Can FreeBSD Do? <nutshell.html#os-overview>`__,
`KDE <x11-wm.html#x11-wm-kde>`__
display manager, `KDE <x11-wm.html#x11-wm-kde>`__
Kerberos5
configure clients, `Configuring a Client to Use
Kerberos <kerberos5.html#idp75987536>`__
enabling services, `Configuring a Server to Use
Kerberos <kerberos5.html#idp75938128>`__
external resources, `Resources and Further
Information <kerberos5.html#idp76073424>`__
Key Distribution Center, `Setting up a Heimdal
KDC <kerberos5.html#idp75883984>`__
limitations and shortcomings, `Mitigating Kerberos
Limitations <kerberos5.html#idp76057936>`__
kern.cam.scsi\_delay, `SCSI\_DELAY
(kern.cam.scsi\_delay) <configtuning-disk.html#idp74769744>`__
kern.ipc.somaxconn,
`kern.ipc.somaxconn <configtuning-kernel-limits.html#idp74855120>`__
kern.maxfiles,
`kern.maxfiles <configtuning-kernel-limits.html#kern-maxfiles>`__
kernel, `FreeBSD Boot Process <boot-introduction.html>`__
boot interaction, `Stage Three <boot-introduction.html#boot-loader>`__
bootflags, `Last Stage <boot-introduction.html#boot-init>`__
building / installing, `Building and Installing a Custom
Kernel <kernelconfig-building.html>`__
building a custom kernel,
`Synopsis <kernelconfig.html#kernelconfig-synopsis>`__
configuration, `Setting Up the Sound Card <sound-setup.html>`__
configuration file, `The Configuration
File <kernelconfig-config.html>`__
NOTES, `The Configuration File <kernelconfig-config.html>`__
kernel options
COMPAT\_LINUX, `Configuring Linux? Binary
Compatibility <linuxemu-lbc-install.html>`__
IPFILTER, `Enabling IPF <firewalls-ipf.html#idp87255632>`__
IPFILTER\_DEFAULT\_BLOCK, `Enabling
IPF <firewalls-ipf.html#idp87255632>`__
IPFILTER\_LOG, `Enabling IPF <firewalls-ipf.html#idp87255632>`__
IPFIREWALL, `Enabling
IPFW <firewalls-ipfw.html#firewalls-ipfw-enable>`__
IPFIREWALL\_VERBOSE, `Enabling
IPFW <firewalls-ipfw.html#firewalls-ipfw-enable>`__
IPFIREWALL\_VERBOSE\_LIMIT, `Enabling
IPFW <firewalls-ipfw.html#firewalls-ipfw-enable>`__
IPSEC, `VPN over IPsec <ipsec.html>`__
IPSEC\_DEBUG, `VPN over IPsec <ipsec.html>`__
MROUTING, `Multicast
Considerations <network-routing.html#network-routing-multicast>`__
SCSI DELAY, `SCSI\_DELAY
(kern.cam.scsi\_delay) <configtuning-disk.html#idp74769744>`__
keymap, `Console Setup <using-localization.html#setting-console>`__
KLD (kernel loadable object), `Using Windows? NDIS
Drivers <config-network-setup.html#config-network-ndis>`__
KMyMoney, `KMyMoney <desktop-finance.html#idp72338896>`__
Konqueror, `Konqueror <desktop-browsers.html#idp72052816>`__

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="indexdiv">

L
~

L2CAP, `Logical Link Control and Adaptation Protocol
(L2CAP) <network-bluetooth.html#idp88461904>`__
LACP, `Link Aggregation and Failover <network-aggregation.html>`__
lagg, `Link Aggregation and Failover <network-aggregation.html>`__
language codes, `Using Localization <using-localization.html>`__
LCD screen, `Anti-Aliased Fonts <x-fonts.html#antialias>`__
LCP, `Configuring Dial-in Services <userppp.html#userppp-mgetty>`__
LDAP, `Lightweight Directory Access Protocol
(LDAP) <network-ldap.html>`__, `Security
Settings <network-samba.html#idp86226512>`__
LDAP Server, `Configuring an LDAP
Server <network-ldap.html#ldap-config>`__
LibreOffice, `LibreOffice <desktop-productivity.html#idp72183760>`__
limiting users, `Configuring Login
Classes <security-resourcelimits.html#users-limiting>`__
coredumpsize, `Configuring Login
Classes <security-resourcelimits.html#users-limiting>`__
cputime, `Configuring Login
Classes <security-resourcelimits.html#users-limiting>`__
filesize, `Configuring Login
Classes <security-resourcelimits.html#users-limiting>`__
maxproc, `Configuring Login
Classes <security-resourcelimits.html#users-limiting>`__
memorylocked, `Configuring Login
Classes <security-resourcelimits.html#users-limiting>`__
memoryuse, `Configuring Login
Classes <security-resourcelimits.html#users-limiting>`__
openfiles, `Configuring Login
Classes <security-resourcelimits.html#users-limiting>`__
quotas, `Resource Limits <security-resourcelimits.html>`__
sbsize, `Configuring Login
Classes <security-resourcelimits.html#users-limiting>`__
stacksize, `Configuring Login
Classes <security-resourcelimits.html#users-limiting>`__
Linux, `Network Information System (NIS) <network-nis.html>`__
ELF binaries, `Installing Linux? ELF
Binaries <linuxemu-lbc-install.html#idp73851984>`__
Linux binary compatibility,
`Synopsis <linuxemu.html#linuxemu-synopsis>`__
livefs CD, `Emergency Recovery <backup-basics.html#idp78793680>`__
loadbalance, `Link Aggregation and
Failover <network-aggregation.html>`__
loader, `Stage Three <boot-introduction.html#boot-loader>`__
loader configuration, `Stage
Three <boot-introduction.html#boot-loader>`__
locale, `Using Localization <using-localization.html>`__, `Setting
Locale for Login Shell <using-localization.html#setting-locale>`__
localization, `Synopsis <l10n.html#l10n-synopsis>`__
German, `Additional Language-Specific
Resources <lang-setup.html#idp82057296>`__
Greek, `Additional Language-Specific
Resources <lang-setup.html#idp82057296>`__
Japanese, `Additional Language-Specific
Resources <lang-setup.html#idp82057296>`__
Korean, `Additional Language-Specific
Resources <lang-setup.html#idp82057296>`__
Russian, `Russian Language (KOI8-R
Encoding) <lang-setup.html#ru-localize>`__
Traditional Chinese, `Additional Language-Specific
Resources <lang-setup.html#idp82057296>`__
log files
FTP, `Configuration <network-ftp.html#idp86127440>`__
log management, `Log Management and
Rotation <configtuning-syslog.html#idp74505680>`__
log rotation, `Log Management and
Rotation <configtuning-syslog.html#idp74505680>`__
login class, `Setting Locale for Login
Shell <using-localization.html#setting-locale>`__, `Utilities Which
Change Login Classes <using-localization.html#idp81850704>`__
ls1, `Permissions <permissions.html>`__

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="indexdiv">

M
~

m0n0wall, `Who Uses
FreeBSD? <nutshell.html#introduction-nutshell-users>`__
MAC, `Synopsis <mac.html#mac-synopsis>`__
File System Firewall Policy, `The MAC BSD Extended
Policy <mac-policies.html#mac-bsdextended>`__
MAC Biba Integrity Policy, `The MAC Biba
Module <mac-policies.html#mac-biba>`__
MAC Configuration Testing, `Testing the
Configuration <mac-implementing.html#idp77817040>`__
MAC Interface Silencing Policy, `The MAC Interface Silencing
Policy <mac-policies.html#mac-ifoff>`__
MAC LOMAC, `The MAC Low-watermark
Module <mac-policies.html#mac-lomac>`__
MAC Multi-Level Security Policy, `The MAC Multi-Level Security
Module <mac-policies.html#mac-mls>`__
MAC Port Access Control List Policy, `The MAC Port Access Control List
Policy <mac-policies.html#mac-portacl>`__
MAC Process Partition Policy, `The MAC Partition
Policy <mac-policies.html#mac-partition>`__
MAC See Other UIDs Policy, `The MAC See Other UIDs
Policy <mac-policies.html#mac-seeotheruids>`__
MAC Troubleshooting, `Troubleshooting the MAC
Framework <mac-troubleshoot.html>`__
MacOS, `Generating a Single One-time
Password <one-time-passwords.html#idp75763408>`__
mail host, `Mail Components <mail-using.html>`__
mail server daemons
Exim, `Mail Components <mail-using.html>`__
Postfix, `Mail Components <mail-using.html>`__
qmail, `Mail Components <mail-using.html>`__
Sendmail, `Mail Components <mail-using.html>`__
Mail User Agents, `Mail User Agents <mail-agents.html>`__
mailing list, `Rebuilding World <makeworld.html>`__
make.conf, `Configuration Files <makeworld.html#src-updating>`__
Mandatory Access Control (see MAC)
manual pages, `Manual Pages <basics-more-information.html>`__
Master Boot Record (MBR), `FreeBSD Boot
Process <boot-introduction.html>`__, `The Boot
Manager <boot-introduction.html#boot-boot0>`__
McAfee, `Who Uses
FreeBSD? <nutshell.html#introduction-nutshell-users>`__
memory protection, `What Can FreeBSD Do? <nutshell.html#os-overview>`__
mencoder, `MPlayer and MEncoder <video-playback.html#video-mplayer>`__
mergemaster , `Merging Configuration
Files <makeworld.html#mergemaster>`__
mfsBSD, `Who Uses
FreeBSD? <nutshell.html#introduction-nutshell-users>`__
mgetty, `Configuring Dial-in Services <userppp.html#userppp-mgetty>`__
Microsoft Windows, `BIOS Drive
Numbering <install-steps.html#install-drive-bios-numbering>`__, `File
and Print Services for Microsoft??Windows? Clients
(Samba) <network-samba.html>`__
Microsoft?Windows
device drivers, `Using Windows? NDIS
Drivers <config-network-setup.html#config-network-ndis>`__
MIME, `Setting Locale for Login
Shell <using-localization.html#setting-locale>`__
modem, `Dial-in Service <dialup.html>`__
mod\_perl
Perl, `mod\_perl <network-apache.html#idp86059600>`__
mod\_php
PHP, `mod\_php <network-apache.html#idp86065232>`__
mount8, `Installing FreeBSD on a System Without a Monitor or
Keyboard <install-advanced.html#headless-install>`__
mountd, `Network File System (NFS) <network-nfs.html>`__
moused, `Console Setup <using-localization.html#setting-console>`__
MPlayer, `MPlayer and MEncoder <video-playback.html#video-mplayer>`__
MS-DOS, `BIOS Drive
Numbering <install-steps.html#install-drive-bios-numbering>`__,
`Generating a Single One-time
Password <one-time-passwords.html#idp75763408>`__
multi-user facilities, `What Can FreeBSD
Do? <nutshell.html#os-overview>`__
multi-user mode, `Multi-User
Mode <boot-introduction.html#boot-multiuser>`__
multicast routing, `Multicast
Considerations <network-routing.html#network-routing-multicast>`__
MX record, `Mail Components <mail-using.html>`__,
`Troubleshooting <mail-trouble.html>`__, `Basic
Configuration <mail-advanced.html#mail-config>`__, `Zone
Files <network-dns.html#idp85764432>`__

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="indexdiv">

N
~

Nagios in a MAC Jail, `Nagios in a MAC Jail <mac-implementing.html>`__
NAS4Free, `Who Uses
FreeBSD? <nutshell.html#introduction-nutshell-users>`__
NAT, `What Can FreeBSD Do? <nutshell.html#os-overview>`__, `Configuring
NAT <firewalls-ipf.html#idp87405392>`__
and IPFW, `Configuring NAT <firewalls-ipfw.html#network-natd>`__
NDIS, `Using Windows? NDIS
Drivers <config-network-setup.html#config-network-ndis>`__
NDISulator, `Using Windows? NDIS
Drivers <config-network-setup.html#config-network-ndis>`__
net.inet.ip.portrange.\*,
`net.inet.ip.portrange.\* <configtuning-kernel-limits.html#idp74877136>`__
Net/2, `A Brief History of FreeBSD <history.html#intro-history>`__
NetApp, `Who Uses
FreeBSD? <nutshell.html#introduction-nutshell-users>`__
NetBIOS, `Advanced Configuration <userppp.html#idp83682000>`__
NetBSD, `Network Information System (NIS) <network-nis.html>`__
Netcraft, `Who Uses
FreeBSD? <nutshell.html#introduction-nutshell-users>`__
NetEase, `Who Uses
FreeBSD? <nutshell.html#introduction-nutshell-users>`__
Netflix, `Who Uses
FreeBSD? <nutshell.html#introduction-nutshell-users>`__
netgroups, `Using Netgroups <network-nis.html#network-netgroups>`__
network address translation (see NAT)
network cards
configuration, `Setting Up Network Interface
Cards <config-network-setup.html>`__, `Configuring the Network
Card <config-network-setup.html#idp74309072>`__
driver, `Locating the Correct
Driver <config-network-setup.html#idp74226384>`__
testing, `Testing the Ethernet
Card <config-network-setup.html#idp74401488>`__
troubleshooting,
`Troubleshooting <config-network-setup.html#idp74413520>`__
newsyslog, `Log Management and
Rotation <configtuning-syslog.html#idp74505680>`__
newsyslog.conf, `Log Management and
Rotation <configtuning-syslog.html#idp74505680>`__
NFS, `Quotas over NFS <quotas.html#idp78978256>`__, `Network File System
(NFS) <network-nfs.html>`__
configuration, `Configuring the
Server <network-nfs.html#network-configuring-nfs>`__
export examples, `Configuring the
Server <network-nfs.html#network-configuring-nfs>`__
installing multiple machines, `Tracking for Multiple
Machines <small-lan.html>`__
mounting, `Configuring the Client <network-nfs.html#idp84827856>`__
server, `Network File System (NFS) <network-nfs.html>`__
nfsd, `Network File System (NFS) <network-nfs.html>`__
NIS, `Network Information System (NIS) <network-nis.html>`__
client, `Machine Types <network-nis.html#idp84997456>`__
client configuration, `Setting Up an NIS
Client <network-nis.html#idp85150288>`__
domain name, `Choosing a NIS Domain
Name <network-nis.html#idp85048528>`__
domains, `Network Information System (NIS) <network-nis.html>`__
maps, `Initializing the NIS Maps <network-nis.html#idp85106128>`__
master server, `Machine Types <network-nis.html#idp84997456>`__
password formats, `Password Formats <network-nis.html#idp85330768>`__
server configuration, `Configuring the NIS Master
Server <network-nis.html#idp85072592>`__
slave server, `Machine Types <network-nis.html#idp84997456>`__, `Setting
up a NIS Slave Server <network-nis.html#idp85135568>`__
NIS+, `Security Settings <network-samba.html#idp86226512>`__
NOTES, `The Configuration File <kernelconfig-config.html>`__
Novell, `A Brief History of FreeBSD <history.html#intro-history>`__
NTP
ntp.conf, `NTP Configuration <network-ntp.html#idp86275792>`__
ntpd, `Clock Synchronization with NTP <network-ntp.html>`__
null-modem cable, `Installing FreeBSD on a System Without a Monitor or
Keyboard <install-advanced.html#headless-install>`__, `Serial Cables and
Ports <serial.html#term-cables-null>`__, `In-Depth Serial Console
Configuration <serialconsole-setup.html#serialconsole-howto>`__

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="indexdiv">

O
~

OBEX, `OBEX Object Push (OPUSH) <network-bluetooth.html#idp88527312>`__
office suite
Apache OpenOffice , `Apache
OpenOffice <desktop-productivity.html#idp72155600>`__
Calligra, `Calligra <desktop-productivity.html#idp72121936>`__
LibreOffice, `LibreOffice <desktop-productivity.html#idp72183760>`__
Okular, `Okular <desktop-viewers.html#idp72278224>`__
one-time passwords, `One-time Passwords <one-time-passwords.html>`__
OpenBSD, `Network Information System (NIS) <network-nis.html>`__
OpenSSH, `OpenSSH <openssh.html>`__
client, `Using the SSH Client Utilities <openssh.html#idp76300880>`__
enabling, `Enabling the SSH Server <openssh.html#idp76417360>`__
secure copy, `Using the SSH Client
Utilities <openssh.html#idp76300880>`__
tunneling, `SSH Tunneling <openssh.html#security-ssh-tunneling>`__
OpenSSL
certificate generation, `Generating
Certificates <openssl.html#idp76115664>`__
Opera, `Opera <desktop-browsers.html#idp72022736>`__
OSPF, `Configuring a Router with Static
Routes <network-routing.html#network-static-routes>`__

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="indexdiv">

P
~

packages, `Synopsis <ports.html#ports-synopsis>`__
Pair Networks, `Who Uses
FreeBSD? <nutshell.html#introduction-nutshell-users>`__
PAP, `PAP and CHAP Authentication <userppp.html#userppp-PAPnCHAP>`__
partition layout, `Designing the Partition
Layout <bsdinstall-partitioning.html#configtuning-initial>`__
partitions, `Disk Organization <disk-organization.html>`__, `Adding
Disks <disks-adding.html>`__, `Resizing and Growing
Disks <disks-growing.html>`__
passwd, `passwd <users-synopsis.html#users-passwd>`__
password, `PAP and CHAP
Authentication <userppp.html#userppp-PAPnCHAP>`__
pax, `Directory Backups <backup-basics.html#idp78719952>`__
PC-BSD, `Who Uses
FreeBSD? <nutshell.html#introduction-nutshell-users>`__
PCI, `Setting Up the Sound Card <sound-setup.html>`__
PDF
viewing, `Xpdf <desktop-viewers.html#idp72235856>`__,
`gv <desktop-viewers.html#idp72244048>`__,
`ePDFView <desktop-viewers.html#idp72269008>`__,
`Okular <desktop-viewers.html#idp72278224>`__
permissions, `Permissions <permissions.html>`__
symbolic, `Symbolic Permissions <permissions.html#idp70150736>`__
pfSense, `Who Uses
FreeBSD? <nutshell.html#introduction-nutshell-users>`__
pgp keys, `OpenPGP Keys <pgpkeys.html>`__
pkg, `Monitoring Third Party Security Issues <security-pkg.html>`__
search, `Finding Software <ports-finding-applications.html>`__
POP, `Mail Components <mail-using.html>`__
portmap, `NIS Terms and Processes <network-nis.html#idp84965328>`__
portmaster, `Upgrading Ports Using
Portmaster <ports-using.html#portmaster>`__
ports, `Synopsis <ports.html#ports-synopsis>`__
disk-space, `Ports and Disk Space <ports-using.html#ports-disk-space>`__
installing, `Installing Ports <ports-using.html#ports-skeleton>`__
removing, `Removing Installed Ports <ports-using.html#ports-removing>`__
upgrading, `Upgrading Ports <ports-using.html#ports-upgrading>`__
Ports Collection, `Configuring Linux? Binary
Compatibility <linuxemu-lbc-install.html>`__
portupgrade, `Upgrading Ports Using
Portupgrade <ports-using.html#portupgrade>`__
POSIX, `Directory Backups <backup-basics.html#idp78719952>`__, `Setting
Locale for Login Shell <using-localization.html#setting-locale>`__
PostScript
viewing, `gv <desktop-viewers.html#idp72244048>`__
PPP, `Synopsis <ppp-and-slip.html#ppp-and-slip-synopsis>`__
configuration, `Final System
Configuration <userppp.html#userppp-final>`__
Microsoft extensions, `Advanced
Configuration <userppp.html#idp83682000>`__
NAT, `Using PPP Network Address Translation
Capability <userppp.html#userppp-nat>`__
over ATM, `Using PPP over ATM (PPPoA) <pppoa.html>`__
over Ethernet, `Synopsis <ppp-and-slip.html#ppp-and-slip-synopsis>`__,
`Using PPP over Ethernet (PPPoE) <pppoe.html>`__
troubleshooting, `Troubleshooting PPP
Connections <ppp-troubleshoot.html>`__
with static IP addresses, `Basic
Configuration <userppp.html#userppp-staticIP>`__
PPPoA, `Using PPP over ATM (PPPoA) <pppoa.html>`__
preemptive multitasking, `What Can FreeBSD
Do? <nutshell.html#os-overview>`__
print server
Windows clients, `File and Print Services for Microsoft??Windows?
Clients (Samba) <network-samba.html>`__
printers, `Russian Language (KOI8-R
Encoding) <lang-setup.html#ru-localize>`__
Process Accounting, `Process Accounting <security-accounting.html>`__
procmail, `Using procmail <mail-procmail.html>`__
pw, `pw <users-synopsis.html#users-pw>`__, `Utilities Which Change Login
Classes <using-localization.html#idp81850704>`__
Python, `Django <network-apache.html#idp86095184>`__

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="indexdiv">

Q
~

quotas, `Resource Limits <security-resourcelimits.html>`__

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="indexdiv">

R
~

RAID1, `RAID1 - Mirroring <geom-mirror.html>`__
RAID3, `RAID3 - Byte-level Striping with Dedicated
Parity <geom-raid3.html>`__
Rambler, `Who Uses
FreeBSD? <nutshell.html#introduction-nutshell-users>`__
rc files, `Multi-User Mode <boot-introduction.html#boot-multiuser>`__
rc.conf, `Managing System-Specific
Configuration <configtuning-rcd.html#configtuning-core-configuration>`__
rc.serial, `Serial Port Configuration <serial.html#serial-hw-config>`__,
`Modem Configuration <dialup.html#dialup-ttys>`__
Rebuilding world, `Rebuilding World <makeworld.html>`__
rebuilding world
timings, `Variables and Targets <makeworld.html#make-buildworld>`__
refresh rate, `Xorg Configuration <x-config.html>`__
resolv.conf,
`/etc/resolv.conf <configtuning-configfiles.html#idp74655440>`__
resolver, `Domain Name System (DNS) <network-dns.html>`__
Resource limits, `Resource Limits <security-resourcelimits.html>`__
restore, `File System Backups <backup-basics.html#idp78687952>`__
reverse DNS, `Domain Name System (DNS) <network-dns.html>`__
RIP, `Configuring a Router with Static
Routes <network-routing.html#network-static-routes>`__
rmuser, `rmuser <users-synopsis.html#users-rmuser>`__
root file system, `Mounting and Unmounting File
Systems <mount-unmount.html>`__
root zone, `Domain Name System (DNS) <network-dns.html>`__
roundrobin, `Link Aggregation and Failover <network-aggregation.html>`__
routed, `Final System Configuration <userppp.html#userppp-final>`__
router, `What Can FreeBSD Do? <nutshell.html#os-overview>`__,
`Configuring a Router with Static
Routes <network-routing.html#network-static-routes>`__
routing, `Gateways and Routes <network-routing.html>`__
rpcbind, `Network File System (NFS) <network-nfs.html>`__, `NIS Terms
and Processes <network-nis.html#idp84965328>`__
Ruby on Rails, `Ruby on Rails <network-apache.html#idp86113360>`__

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="indexdiv">

S
~

Samba server, `File and Print Services for Microsoft??Windows? Clients
(Samba) <network-samba.html>`__
Sandvine, `Who Uses
FreeBSD? <nutshell.html#introduction-nutshell-users>`__
scp1, `Using the SSH Client Utilities <openssh.html#idp76300880>`__
screenmap, `Console Setup <using-localization.html#setting-console>`__
SCSI, `BIOS Drive
Numbering <install-steps.html#install-drive-bios-numbering>`__
SDL, `Determining Video
Capabilities <video-playback.html#video-interface>`__
SDP, `Service Discovery Protocol
(SDP) <network-bluetooth.html#idp88493776>`__
security, `Security <security.html>`__
firewalls, `Firewalls <firewalls.html>`__
one-time passwords, `One-time Passwords <one-time-passwords.html>`__
OpenSSH, `OpenSSH <openssh.html>`__
OpenSSL, `OpenSSL <openssl.html>`__
Security Event Auditing (see MAC)
sendmail, `Final System Configuration <userppp.html#userppp-final>`__
Sendmail, `Sendmail Configuration Files <sendmail.html>`__
serial communications, `Synopsis <serialcomms.html#serial-synopsis>`__
serial console, `Installing FreeBSD on a System Without a Monitor or
Keyboard <install-advanced.html#headless-install>`__, `Setting Up the
Serial Console <serialconsole-setup.html>`__
services, `Starting Services <configtuning-starting-services.html>`__
shared libraries, `Installing Additional Libraries
Manually <linuxemu-lbc-install.html#linuxemu-libs-manually>`__
shells, `Shells <shells.html>`__
shutdown8, `Shutdown Sequence <boot-shutdown.html>`__
signal 11, `Common Questions <makeworld.html#updating-questions>`__
Sina, `Who Uses FreeBSD? <nutshell.html#introduction-nutshell-users>`__
single-user mode, `Stage Three <boot-introduction.html#boot-loader>`__,
`Single-User Mode <boot-introduction.html#boot-singleuser>`__, `Overview
of Process <makeworld.html#canonical-build>`__
skeleton directory, `adduser <users-synopsis.html#users-adduser>`__
slices, `Disk Organization <disk-organization.html>`__
SMTP, `Final System Configuration <userppp.html#userppp-final>`__,
`Basic Configuration <mail-advanced.html#mail-config>`__
soft limit, `Setting Quota Limits <quotas.html#idp78949968>`__
Soft Updates, `Soft Updates <configtuning-disk.html#soft-updates>`__
details, `More Details About Soft
Updates <configtuning-disk.html#idp74792656>`__
Software RAID Devices
Hardware-assisted RAID, `Software RAID Devices <geom-graid.html>`__
Solaris, `Advanced Topics <linuxemu-advanced.html>`__, `Network
Information System (NIS) <network-nis.html>`__
Sony, `Who Uses FreeBSD? <nutshell.html#introduction-nutshell-users>`__
Sony Japan, `Who Uses
FreeBSD? <nutshell.html#introduction-nutshell-users>`__
Sophos, `Who Uses
FreeBSD? <nutshell.html#introduction-nutshell-users>`__
sound cards, `Setting Up the Sound Card <sound-setup.html>`__
source code, `What Can FreeBSD Do? <nutshell.html#os-overview>`__
SourceForge, `Finding Software <ports-finding-applications.html>`__
Spectra Logic, `Who Uses
FreeBSD? <nutshell.html#introduction-nutshell-users>`__
spreadsheet
Gnumeric, `Gnumeric <desktop-finance.html#idp72317648>`__
KMyMoney, `KMyMoney <desktop-finance.html#idp72338896>`__
SQL database, `Security Settings <network-samba.html#idp86226512>`__
src.conf, `Configuration Files <makeworld.html#src-updating>`__
SSH
sshd, `Enabling SSH Login <install-post.html#ssh-login>`__
SSL, `mod\_ssl <network-apache.html#idp86053072>`__
static IP address, `Configuring PPP <userppp.html>`__
Striping, `RAID0 - Striping <geom-striping.html>`__
subnet, `Gateways and Routes <network-routing.html>`__
Subversion, `The FreeBSD Development
Model <history.html#development>`__, `Using
FreeBSD-STABLE <current-stable.html#stable>`__, `Synchronizing
Source <synching.html>`__, `Using Subversion <svn.html>`__
Subversion Repository, `The FreeBSD Development
Model <history.html#development>`__
Mirror Sites, `Subversion Mirror Sites <svn.html#svn-mirrors>`__
SVN (see Subversion)
swap
encrypting, `Encrypting Swap <swap-encrypting.html>`__
swap partition, `Designing the Partition
Layout <bsdinstall-partitioning.html#configtuning-initial>`__
swap sizing, `Designing the Partition
Layout <bsdinstall-partitioning.html#configtuning-initial>`__
symbolic links, `Installing Additional Libraries
Manually <linuxemu-lbc-install.html#linuxemu-libs-manually>`__
Symmetric Multi-Processing (SMP), `What Can FreeBSD
Do? <nutshell.html#os-overview>`__
sysctl, `Tuning with sysctl(8) <configtuning-sysctl.html>`__,
`sysctl.conf <configtuning-sysctl.html#configtuning-sysctlconf>`__
sysctl.conf,
`sysctl.conf <configtuning-sysctl.html#configtuning-sysctlconf>`__
syslog, `Configuring System Logging <configtuning-syslog.html>`__,
`Configuration <network-ftp.html#idp86127440>`__
syslog.conf, `Configuring Local
Logging <configtuning-syslog.html#idp74466896>`__
syslogd8, `Configuring System Logging <configtuning-syslog.html>`__
system configuration, `Synopsis <config-tuning.html#config-synopsis>`__
system logging, `Configuring System
Logging <configtuning-syslog.html>`__
system optimization, `Synopsis <config-tuning.html#config-synopsis>`__

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="indexdiv">

T
~

tape media, `Using Data Tapes for
Backups <backup-basics.html#backups-tapebackups>`__
tar, `Directory Backups <backup-basics.html#idp78719952>`__
TCP Bandwidth Delay Product Limiting
net.inet.tcp.inflight.enable, `TCP Bandwidth Delay
Product <configtuning-kernel-limits.html#idp74888784>`__
TCP Wrapper, `TCP Wrapper <tcpwrappers.html>`__, `NIS
Security <network-nis.html#idp85179216>`__
TCP/IP networking, `What Can FreeBSD Do? <nutshell.html#os-overview>`__
TELEHOUSE America, `Who Uses
FreeBSD? <nutshell.html#introduction-nutshell-users>`__
terminals, `Virtual Consoles and Terminals <consoles.html>`__,
`Terminals <term.html>`__
tether, `USB Tethering <network-usb-tethering.html>`__
text editors, `Text Editors <editors.html>`__
The GIMP, `The GIMP <desktop-productivity.html#idp72148048>`__
The Weather Channel, `Who Uses
FreeBSD? <nutshell.html#introduction-nutshell-users>`__
traceroute8,
`Troubleshooting <network-routing.html#network-routing-troubleshooting>`__
Traditional Chinese
BIG-5 encoding, `Login Classes
Method <using-localization.html#login-class>`__
TrueType Fonts, `TrueType? Fonts <x-fonts.html#truetype>`__
ttyu, `Serial Port Configuration <serial.html#serial-hw-config>`__
tunefs8, `Soft Updates <configtuning-disk.html#soft-updates>`__
tuning
kernel limits, `Tuning Kernel
Limits <configtuning-kernel-limits.html>`__
with sysctl, `Tuning with sysctl(8) <configtuning-sysctl.html>`__
TV cards, `TV Cards <tvcard.html>`__

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="indexdiv">

U
~

U.C. Berkeley, `A Brief History of
FreeBSD <history.html#intro-history>`__
UDP, `Configuring a DHCP Client <network-dhcp.html#idp85453264>`__
UNIX, `Permissions <permissions.html>`__
Updating and Upgrading, `FreeBSD
Update <updating-upgrading-freebsdupdate.html>`__, `Updating the
Documentation Set <updating-upgrading-documentation.html>`__, `Updating
Documentation from
Ports <updating-upgrading-documentation.html#doc-ports-install-package>`__
USB
disks, `USB Storage Devices <usb-disks.html>`__
users
large sites running FreeBSD, `Who Uses
FreeBSD? <nutshell.html#introduction-nutshell-users>`__

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="indexdiv">

V
~

Verisign, `Who Uses
FreeBSD? <nutshell.html#introduction-nutshell-users>`__
vertical scan rate (see refresh rate)
vertical sync frequency (see refresh rate)
vfs.hirunningspace,
`vfs.hirunningspace <configtuning-disk.html#idp74743632>`__
vfs.vmiodirenable,
`vfs.vmiodirenable <configtuning-disk.html#idp74730064>`__
vfs.write\_behind,
`vfs.write\_behind <configtuning-disk.html#idp74735696>`__
vi, `Text Editors <editors.html>`__
video packages, `Ports and Packages Dealing with
Video <video-playback.html#video-ports>`__
video ports, `Ports and Packages Dealing with
Video <video-playback.html#video-ports>`__
vipw, `Utilities Which Change Login
Classes <using-localization.html#idp81850704>`__
virtual consoles, `Virtual Consoles and Terminals <consoles.html>`__
virtual hosts, `Virtual Hosts <configtuning-virtual-hosts.html>`__
virtual memory, `What Can FreeBSD Do? <nutshell.html#os-overview>`__
virtual private network (see VPN)
vm.swap\_idle\_enabled,
`vm.swap\_idle\_enabled <configtuning-disk.html#idp74753488>`__
Voxer, `Who Uses FreeBSD? <nutshell.html#introduction-nutshell-users>`__
VPN, `VPN over IPsec <ipsec.html>`__

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="indexdiv">

W
~

Walnut Creek CDROM, `A Brief History of
FreeBSD <history.html#intro-history>`__
Weathernews, `Who Uses
FreeBSD? <nutshell.html#introduction-nutshell-users>`__
web servers, `What Can FreeBSD Do? <nutshell.html#os-overview>`__
dynamic, `Dynamic Websites <network-apache.html#idp86091472>`__
secure, `mod\_ssl <network-apache.html#idp86053072>`__
setting up, `Apache HTTP Server <network-apache.html>`__
WhatsApp, `Who Uses
FreeBSD? <nutshell.html#introduction-nutshell-users>`__
Wheel Systems, `Who Uses
FreeBSD? <nutshell.html#introduction-nutshell-users>`__
widescreen flatpanel configuration, `Adding a Widescreen Flatpanel to
the Mix <x11-understanding.html#idp71891536>`__
Williams, Nate, `A Brief History of
FreeBSD <history.html#intro-history>`__
Windows, `Generating a Single One-time
Password <one-time-passwords.html#idp75763408>`__
Windows drivers, `Using Windows? NDIS
Drivers <config-network-setup.html#config-network-ndis>`__
wireless networking, `Wireless Networking <network-wireless.html>`__

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="indexdiv">

X
~

X Display Manager, `The X Display Manager <x-xdm.html>`__
X Input Method (XIM), `Xorg
Setup <using-localization.html#idp81934672>`__
X Window System, `What Can FreeBSD Do? <nutshell.html#os-overview>`__
XML, `Anti-Aliased Fonts <x-fonts.html#antialias>`__
Xorg, `Xorg Configuration <x-config.html>`__
Xorg tuning, `Troubleshooting <x11-understanding.html>`__
xorg.conf, `Troubleshooting <x11-understanding.html>`__
Xpdf, `Xpdf <desktop-viewers.html#idp72235856>`__
XVideo, `Determining Video
Capabilities <video-playback.html#video-interface>`__

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="indexdiv">

Y
~

Yahoo!, `Who Uses
FreeBSD? <nutshell.html#introduction-nutshell-users>`__
Yandex, `Who Uses
FreeBSD? <nutshell.html#introduction-nutshell-users>`__
yellow pages (see NIS)

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="indexdiv">

Z
~

zones
examples, `Domain Name System (DNS) <network-dns.html>`__
ZRouter, `Who Uses
FreeBSD? <nutshell.html#introduction-nutshell-users>`__

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div class="navfooter">

--------------

+-------------------------------------+-------------------------+-------------------------------+
| `Prev <freebsd-glossary.html>`__?   | ?                       | ?\ `Next <colophon.html>`__   |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------+-------------------------------+
| FreeBSD Glossary?                   | `Home <index.html>`__   | ?Colophon                     |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------+-------------------------------+

.. raw:: html

   </div>

All FreeBSD documents are available for download at
http://ftp.FreeBSD.org/pub/FreeBSD/doc/

| Questions that are not answered by the
  `documentation <http://www.FreeBSD.org/docs.html>`__ may be sent to
  <freebsd-questions@FreeBSD.org\ >.
|  Send questions about this document to <freebsd-doc@FreeBSD.org\ >.
